                                 HHS Public Access
                                 Author manuscript
                                 Curr Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 May 06.




Author Manuscript
                    Published in final edited form as:
                     Curr Biol. 2024 May 06; 34(9): 1819–1830.e6. doi:10.1016/j.cub.2024.03.019.



                    The tardigrade Hypsibius exemplaris dramatically upregulates
                    DNA repair pathway genes in response to ionizing radiation
                    Courtney M. Clark-Hachtel1,2,6,7,8,*, Jonathan D. Hibshman1, Tristan De Buysscher1,3, Evan
                    R. Stair4, Leslie M. Hicks4, Bob Goldstein1,5
                    1Biology Department, The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599,

                    USA




Author Manuscript
                    2Biology Department, The University of North Carolina at Asheville, Asheville, NC 28804, USA

                    3Bioinformatics & Analytics Research Collaborative, The University of North Carolina at Chapel

                    Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA
                    4Department of Chemistry, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599,

                    USA
                    5Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill,

                    Biology, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA
                    6Current Address: Biology Department, The University of North Carolina at Asheville, Asheville,

                    NC 28804, USA
                    7X (formerly Twitter): ArthropodQueen




Author Manuscript
                    8Lead contact



                    SUMMARY
                         Tardigrades can survive remarkable doses of ionizing radiation, up to about 1000 times the lethal
                         dose for humans. How they do so is incompletely understood. We found that the tardigrade
                         Hypsibius exemplaris suffers DNA damage upon gamma irradiation, but damage is repaired. We
                         show that this species has a specific and robust response to ionizing radiation: irradiation induces
                         a rapid upregulation of many DNA repair genes. This upregulation is unexpectedly extreme –
                         making some DNA repair transcripts among the most abundant transcripts in the animal. By
                         expressing tardigrade genes in bacteria, we validate that increased expression of some repair genes
                         can suffice to increase radiation tolerance. We show that at least one such gene is important in




Author Manuscript
                    *
                     Correspondence: clarkcm6@email.unc.edu.
                    AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS: Conceptualization, CMCH, BG; Methodology, CMCH, JDH, TD, ERS; Formal Analysis, CMCH;
                    Investigation, CMCH, JDH, TD, ERS; Writing - Original Draft, CMCH; Writing - Reviewing and Editing, CMCH, JDH, TD, ERS,
                    LMH, BG; Visualization, CMCH; Supervision, BG; Funding Acquisition, BG, JDH, ERS, LMH.
                    Publisher's Disclaimer: This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our
                    customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review
                    of the resulting proof before it is published in its final form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered
                    which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.
                    DECLARATION OF INTERESTS: The authors declare no competing interests.
                    SUPPLEMENTAL ITEMS
                    Figures S1–S6
                    Tables S1–S5
                    Clark-Hachtel et al.                                                                                            Page 2


                             vivo for tardigrade radiation tolerance. We hypothesize that tardigrades’ ability to sense ionizing




Author Manuscript
                             radiation and massively upregulate specific DNA repair pathway genes may represent an evolved
                             solution for maintaining DNA integrity.

                       eTOC Blurb
                             Clark-Hachtel et al. investigate how tardigrades survive high doses of ionizing radiation and
                             discover that the tardigrade Hypsibius exemplaris dramatically upregulates DNA repair genes in
                             response to radiation. This regulation of DNA repair pathway genes may represent an evolved
                             solution for maintaining DNA integrity under genotoxic stress.


                       Keywords
                             tardigrades; radiation tolerance; DNA repair; genome stability




Author Manuscript
                       INTRODUCTION
                                           Some organisms have evolved to survive conditions that to most organisms would be lethal,
                                           including extreme heat, extreme cold, and desiccation1–7. Revealing the mechanisms that
                                           these organisms employ to survive under stressful conditions can aid in understanding stress
                                           tolerance and may contribute to improving the survival of less tolerant organisms, cells, or
                                           biological materials in the face of stress.

                                           Tardigrades are well known for their ability to survive in environments where other animals
                                           would not5,6. Some tardigrade species have been demonstrated to survive desiccation as well
                                           as extreme pressures, low temperatures, and high levels of ionizing radiation (IR)5–11. For




Author Manuscript
                                           example, while the dose of IR at which 50% of humans would die (LD50) is 5 gray (Gy), the
                                           tardigrade Hypsibius exemplaris can survive ~4,000 Gy12,13. At these levels of IR we would
                                           expect massive amounts of DNA damage and genomic instability14,15.

                                           Little is known about the specific mechanisms that underlie tardigrade extreme resistance to
                                           genotoxic stress. Most of what is known comes from work in the tardigrade Ramazzottius
                                           cf. varieornatus, a species with a similar IR tolerance to H. exemplaris15. R. cf. varieornatus
                                           produces a DNA damage suppressing protein (Dsup) that can confer IR resistance when
                                           expressed in human cultured HEK 293T cells15,16. Biochemical studies of this protein
                                           have revealed that it protects DNA from IR by binding to DNA and nucleosomes and
                                           protecting DNA from hydroxyl radicals that are generated by IR-exposed cells17. The
                                           identification of Dsup suggested that R. cf. varieornatus can survive high doses of IR
                                           through the employment of protective mechanisms that prevent damage to the DNA.




Author Manuscript
                                           However, it remains unclear if protective mechanisms can fully explain the extreme IR
                                           tolerance of tardigrades. The protein sequence of Dsup is not well conserved within the
                                           eutardigrade lineage; hence, it is unclear if other eutardigrade species’ Dsup proteins have
                                           the same protective abilities16,18. Furthermore, heterotardigrade species, some of which have
                                           been shown to have strong IR tolerance, seemingly lack a Dsup homolog, suggesting that
                                           different tardigrade species may employ different mechanisms to survive high levels of
                                           IR18–20.


                                                  Curr Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 May 06.
                    Clark-Hachtel et al.                                                                                           Page 3


                                           Here, we set out to understand how the tardigrade H. exemplaris can survive extreme IR.




Author Manuscript
                                           Through DNA damage assays, expression analyses, and functional studies, we show that H.
                                           exemplaris tardigrades do experience DNA damage upon IR exposure, that they upregulate
                                           DNA repair transcripts to a remarkable and unexpected degree in response to IR, and that the
                                           increased expression of some DNA repair transcripts is both sufficient to confer IR tolerance
                                           to bacteria and important for H. exemplaris IR tolerance.


                       RESULTS
                       H. exemplaris experiences DNA damage from ionizing radiation
                                           To visualize the level and location of DNA damage in tardigrades following IR exposure,
                                           we adapted a terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase dUTP nick end labeling (TUNEL) assay
                                           for use on whole animals (see STAR Methods). TUNEL assays are commonly used to
                                           visualize DNA single-stranded (ss) and double-stranded (ds) breaks21. We exposed animals




Author Manuscript
                                           to a well-tolerated dose of gamma irradiation (2,180 Gy), as well as a dose near the LD50
                                           (4,360 Gy)13. Animals that were never exposed to IR had little TUNEL signal throughout
                                           their nuclei (Figure 1). We found that animals exposed to IR had significantly more TUNEL
                                           signal per nucleus than control animals (Figure 1). This suggests that the tardigrades indeed
                                           experience DNA damage from IR exposure. To determine if damage is repaired, we exposed
                                           animals to the same doses of gamma irradiation and allowed them to recover for 24 hours
                                           (Figure 1). After a sub-lethal irradiation dose, animals that were exposed to IR and allowed
                                           to recover showed a significant reduction in TUNEL signal per nucleus over 24 hours of
                                           recovery (Figure 1D). These results suggest that H. exemplaris experiences DNA damage
                                           upon extreme levels of IR but is then able to repair much of the damage.

                       H. exemplaris upregulates the transcription of DNA repair pathway genes after exposure to




Author Manuscript
                       ionizing radiation or the DNA-damaging agent bleomycin
                                           H. exemplaris could be engaging in a variety of measures to compensate for DNA damage,
                                           including transcriptomic responses. The well-established animal DNA damage response
                                           only minimally involves transcriptional responses22, yet some modest transcriptional
                                           responses to DNA damaging agents have been observed in other animals with a typical
                                           enrichment of 1.5–4 fold for any responsive transcript23–29. H. exemplaris specifically
                                           has robust transcriptional responses to desiccation, a stress that can also result in DNA
                                           damage30–33. To examine tardigrade transcriptomes after IR, we performed messenger RNA
                                           sequencing (mRNA-Seq) on animals after exposure to 100, 500, or 2,180 Gy doses of IR. H.
                                           exemplaris can survive and reproduce after exposure to 100 Gy13. After exposure to 500 or
                                           2,000 Gy (about half of the LD50), they survive well but no longer reproduce13.




Author Manuscript
                                           Differential expression analysis revealed that H. exemplaris has a robust transcriptional
                                           response to IR exposure, with 4,590 transcripts significantly upregulated and 4,687
                                           downregulated in response to 500 Gy IR (p<.05, Figure 2A, Data S1B). We were intrigued
                                           to find that 7 of the top 15 most significantly enriched transcripts encoded proteins of
                                           DNA repair pathways (Figure 2A, Table S1). These transcripts included representatives
                                           from Base Excision Repair (BER) (DNA LIG1, PNKP, PARP3, PARP2, and PCNA) and
                                           Non-Homologous End Joining (NHEJ) (XRCC5, which encodes Ku80, and DNA LIG4)


                                                  Curr Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 May 06.
                    Clark-Hachtel et al.                                                                                           Page 4


                                           (Figure 2A, Table S1), all of which were upregulated more than 32-fold (Table S1). By




Author Manuscript
                                           comparison, a recent study of the transcriptional response to IR in mammalian cells (X-ray,
                                           2 Gy) identified only PCNA and LIG1 from this list, both of which were upregulated
                                           less than 2-fold24. The remaining genes from the top 15 list are predicted to encode two
                                           eutardigrade-specific proteins with no conserved domains, two predicted histone proteins,
                                           a mitochondrial chaperone BCS1, a protein phosphatase 1B, a protein with RING-HC
                                           and WWE domains, and a partial Ku70 protein with no predicted DNA repair function
                                           (see STAR Methods34) (Table S1). The fact that multiple DNA repair pathway transcripts
                                           are represented in the most significantly enriched transcripts indicates that H. exemplaris
                                           responds to the damage caused by IR by upregulating genes encoding proteins that can
                                           correct damage. The degree of upregulation after IR was high (Log2FC ranging from 5.38–
                                           8.30, i.e. 32- to 315-fold, Table S1). In addition, DNA repair genes constituted some of
                                           the most highly represented transcripts in the animals’ transcriptome after IR (Figure 2B–




Author Manuscript
                                           D and Table S1 and S2) bringing some DNA repair transcripts up nearly to the level of
                                           highly expressed housekeeping genes like elongation factor 1-alpha and cytoplasmic actin
                                           (determined by TPM, Table S2). We performed a gene ontology (GO) analysis for the top
                                           500 most significantly enriched genes following 500 Gy IR. Out of the genes that mapped to
                                           GO terms, 8.6% and 2.3% were assigned to “DNA binding” and “DNA repair”, respectively
                                           (Data S1B). The repair pathways that were most represented after IR exposure (NHEJ and
                                           BER) are most apt to repair the types of DNA damage that commonly result from exposure
                                           to IR35. IR can directly generate dsDNA breaks, which are repaired primarily by the NHEJ
                                           pathway35,36. IR exposure can also lead to the production of reactive oxygen species, which
                                           can cause ssDNA breaks as well as damaged bases, both of which are repaired by BER35,37.

                                           We were curious if other transcripts from NHEJ and BER pathways or from other DNA
                                           repair pathways were also enriched after exposure to IR. We found that multiple BER




Author Manuscript
                                           pathway genes were indeed enriched following IR exposure (Figure 2B, Table S1 and S3). In
                                           addition to the BER genes listed above, the scaffolding protein XRCC1 was also enriched.
                                           We conclude that many of the genes important for BER are upregulated in response to IR.
                                           From NHEJ, XRCC6 (which encodes Ku70) was also enriched following IR (Figure 2C,
                                           Table S3) which, in combination with XRCC5 and LIG4 mentioned above, forms a complete
                                           set of the minimal proteins sufficient to perform NHEJ repair in vitro38.

                                           To examine whether H. exemplaris upregulates other DNA repair pathways in response to
                                           IR, we also looked at transcript enrichment for genes from the Mismatch Repair (MMR,
                                           repairs base mismatches), Nucleotide Excision Repair (NER, removes bulky adducts),
                                           Homologous Recombination (HR, repairs dsDNA breaks), and Theta-Mediated End Joining
                                           (TMEJ, repairs dsDNA breaks) pathways35,39,40. Amongst HR-associated genes, RAD51




Author Manuscript
                                           and BARD1-like were enriched following IR (Figure 2D, Table S3). Transcripts encoding
                                           two out of the three homologs for TMEJ proteins that we identified in tardigrades (DNA
                                           polymerase Theta (POLQ) and LIG1) were also significantly enriched following IR (Figure
                                           2D, Table S1 and S3). No genes from NER or MMR pathways had transcripts significantly
                                           enriched following IR (Figure 2D, Table S4). Taken together, these results reveal specificity
                                           in the transcriptional response of H. exemplaris to IR, with animals increasing the expression
                                           of DNA repair genes from pathways that deal with the types of damage expected to result
                                           from IR. Two of these DNA repair pathways are associated with error-prone repair (NHEJ

                                                  Curr Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 May 06.
                    Clark-Hachtel et al.                                                                                              Page 5


                                           and TMEJ)41. The strong enrichment of transcripts that encode members of these pathways




Author Manuscript
                                           following IR suggests that even error-prone repair may contribute to H. exemplaris IR
                                           tolerance. We found that many of these DNA repair genes are strongly upregulated even
                                           after a 100 Gy dose over one hour (Figure 2E and Data S1B), suggesting a rapid and
                                           robust response. Additionally, many of these genes remained enriched after a 2,180 Gy dose
                                           incurred over approximately 24 hours, suggesting that the initial robust response is sustained
                                           for some time (Figure 2E and Data S1B).

                                           We were curious if the enrichment of the transcripts that encode DNA repair proteins would
                                           result in an increase in protein levels as well. Using label-free quantitative proteomics, we
                                           were able to quantify six of the DNA repair proteins of interest after exposure to 500 Gy IR
                                           and a recovery period of either 6 or 18 hours (PNKP, PCNA, PARP3, BARD1-like, XRCC5,
                                           and XRCC6, Figure 2F). Although not significantly increased at a threshold FDR<0.05,
                                           Log2FC>1, the relative abundance of most of the DNA repair proteins identified trends




Author Manuscript
                                           upwards 18 hours after exposure to IR, with four proteins having Log2FC > 1 and FDR <
                                           0.10 across the untreated and 18-hour recovery conditions. It has been recently observed
                                           using an isobaric labeling method and further verified through Western blots that the
                                           majority of these DNA repair proteins are significantly enriched at 24 hours after exposure
                                           to 1000 Gy IR, including XRCC5, which was the only repair protein that had a modest
                                           downward trend in our analysis42. Taken together, this suggests that DNA repair components
                                           are also enriched at the protein level following IR exposure.

                                           Like IR, desiccation is also a stress that results in DNA damage43,44. Some similarities
                                           in transcriptomic responses to desiccation and other DNA damaging agents such as UV
                                           radiation have been previously reported for tardigrades45. We were curious if we would
                                           see a correlation between the transcriptomic responses of tardigrades to desiccation and




Author Manuscript
                                           those of IR. Comparing the changes in relative abundance of each transcript in response to
                                           desiccation vs IR did not reveal an obvious correlation in the transcriptional responses to
                                           these two stresses (Figure 3A–B)30–32. This result suggests that, at least at the transcriptional
                                           level, H. exemplaris may employ different methods to deal with these two genotoxic
                                           stressors.

                                           As mentioned, IR creates dsDNA and ssDNA breaks and can result in damaged DNA
                                           bases through the action of ROS35–37. It is possible that the transcriptomic responses we
                                           observed are triggered by mechanisms linked to DNA damage. However, it is also possible
                                           that the production of ROS induced by IR leads to oxidative stress and this signal is
                                           responsible for activating the transcriptomic response to IR. To test if DNA damage induces
                                           the transcriptomic responses we observed regardless of the cause of damage, we induced




Author Manuscript
                                           DNA damage in H. exemplaris by soaking them in the chemotherapy drug bleomycin.
                                           Bleomycin is a known radiomimetic and induces both ssDNA and dsDNA breaks46. From
                                           the doses that we performed survival analyses on, we identified that a treatment of 1 mg/mL
                                           bleomycin for 24 hours is physiologically similar to a 500 Gy IR treatment in that animals
                                           survive the treatment but are no longer able to reproduce (11.7% survival 7 days after
                                           bleomycin treatment, Figure S1 A and B)13. We performed mRNA sequencing on animals
                                           exposed to 10 μg/mL, 100 μg/mL, and 1 mg/mL bleomycin and compared the transcriptomic
                                           response to what we observed from our 500 Gy IR treatment. We found evidence for a


                                                  Curr Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 May 06.
                    Clark-Hachtel et al.                                                                                             Page 6


                                           correlation between the transcriptional responses to these two genotoxic stresses, with all




Author Manuscript
                                           the DNA repair transcripts that are significantly enriched by IR also significantly enriched
                                           by each concentration of bleomycin examined (Figure 3C, Figure S1 C and D, Pearson
                                           correlation test p<0.0001, r2=0.0962, 0.2311, and 0.2103 for 10 μg/mL, 100 μg/mL, and 1
                                           mg/mL respectively). This outcome supports the idea that H. exemplaris may be responding
                                           specifically to the DNA damage that IR induces and validates bleomycin as a radiomimetic
                                           tool for this species. It is worth noting here that homologs of some of the transcripts induced
                                           by IR in H. exemplaris are also modestly induced by UV radiation in R. cf. varieornatus
                                           (transcripts encoding Ku80, PARP2, histone H4 domain-containing protein, core histone
                                           macro-H2A.1, and mitochondrial chaperone BCS1)45. Although UV irradiation and IR
                                           initially create fundamentally different types of DNA damage (bulky adducts vs. ssDNA
                                           and dsDNA breaks, respectively)35–37,47, their resolution can utilize both BER and dsDNA
                                           repair pathways47, lending further support to the idea that these animals are sensing the




Author Manuscript
                                           specific type of DNA damage and responding accordingly.

                       DNA repair transcripts are upregulated throughout the animal following ionizing radiation
                       exposure with some tissue-specific enrichment
                                           Our results above, demonstrating a strong and diverse response to IR, led us to wonder
                                           whether these responses occur throughout entire tardigrades or whether there are specific
                                           tissues that drive this response. To determine whether specific tissues respond to IR by
                                           upregulating repair transcripts, we performed in situ hybridization for a sample of the
                                           DNA repair transcripts that were enriched following IR exposure. After exposure to 100
                                           Gy IR, enrichment of transcripts was detectable via in situ hybridization for the DNA
                                           repair transcripts that we examined, confirming our mRNA-Seq results (Figure 4, Figure S2–
                                           S4). All DNA repair transcripts that we observed became enriched in nearly all examined




Author Manuscript
                                           tissues after IR exposure (Figure S4) but also demonstrated some extent of tissue-specific
                                           enrichment (Figure 4, Figure S2–S4). For multiple DNA repair genes, transcripts were
                                           especially enriched in cuticle-forming tissues (stylet glands, claw glands, and the hindgut)
                                           (Figure 4, Figure S2–S4)48,49. In addition, we observed expression enrichment in storage
                                           cells (coelomocytes) for all but one of the DNA repair transcripts we observed (Figure S4).
                                           We conclude that the responses to IR exposure that we have identified are strongest in
                                           certain tissues, including cuticle-forming tissues, which are expected to be especially active
                                           in transcription and translation.

                       Expression of tardigrade DNA repair transcripts in bacteria can confer resistance to
                       ionizing radiation
                                           We considered it likely that the increased expression of DNA repair transcripts that we




Author Manuscript
                                           found in H. exemplaris might be sufficient to protect against IR exposure. Gene editing
                                           technology is in its infancy in tardigrades, making sufficiency experiments within H.
                                           exemplaris difficult50. To validate whether increased expression of these transcripts can ever
                                           suffice to increase protection against IR, we instead expressed tardigrade DNA repair genes
                                           heterologously in Escherichia coli (E. coli), a biologically simple system for evaluation
                                           of IR tolerance phenotypes. Bacteria induced to express H. exemplaris DNA repair genes
                                           were exposed to 2,180 Gy IR to see if they would survive better than E. coli containing
                                           control expression vectors that were either empty (no gene insertion) or contained a control


                                                  Curr Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 May 06.
                    Clark-Hachtel et al.                                                                                             Page 7


                                           sequence encoding GFP. In addition, we used a vector expressing the R. cf. varieornatus




Author Manuscript
                                           Dsup gene as a positive control, as it has been previously shown to improve radiation
                                           survival of human HEK 293T cells15. We found that expression of some tardigrade DNA
                                           repair genes could significantly improve the IR tolerance of E. coli relative to controls
                                           (Figure 5A and Figure S5). Transcripts that improved survival included RAD51, XRCC1,
                                           FEN1, LIG1, PARP2, and POLB. All of these genes except for RAD51 (HR pathway)
                                           encode proteins in the BER pathway (Figure 5A). For some DNA repair genes, expression
                                           conferred about as strong protection as did expression of the known DNA protectant Dsup
                                           (Figure 5A). This improved survival is not caused simply by induction of transcription per
                                           se, as the bacteria carrying the control vectors were also transcriptionally induced. Many
                                           of the H. exemplaris DNA repair components that confer IR tolerance to E. coli do not
                                           have homologs in bacteria35. The few that do include RAD51 (RecA) and LIG1 (bacterial
                                           DNA ligase)35. RAD51 encodes a DNA-binding protein and may provide IR protection in
                                           a heterologous system via physical interaction with DNA51. Due to its homology to RecA,




Author Manuscript
                                           RAD51 could also be hardening bacteria to IR through activation of the bacterial DNA
                                           damage response52. The conservation of LIG1 from bacteria through humans presents the
                                           possibility that this DNA repair component may be improving IR survival in E. coli through
                                           its ligase activity, although further work needs to be done to confirm this. Some of the
                                           H. exemplaris DNA repair components that result in improved IR survival of E. coli have
                                           evolved to function in multi-protein complexes that bacteria lack35 and thus may protect
                                           bacteria from IR by different mechanisms than those used in H. exemplaris. Regardless of
                                           the specific mechanisms of protection, these data validate the expectation that increased
                                           expression of these transcripts in an organism can indeed be sufficient to confer increased
                                           protection against IR.

                       A DNA repair transcript is required for H. exemplaris ionizing radiation tolerance




Author Manuscript
                                           To determine if one of the upregulated DNA repair transcripts is essential for the ability of
                                           tardigrades to survive IR, we attempted to decrease the amount that a DNA repair transcript
                                           enriches in response to IR via RNA interference (RNAi). H. exemplaris is amenable to RNAi
                                           and has a systemic RNAi response: genes can be targeted in adults and their offspring by
                                           injection of double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) into individual animals30,53. We chose XRCC5
                                           as a target because it was among the most significantly enriched gene transcripts following
                                           exposure to IR (Figure 2A and C, Table S1 and S2) and because its importance to IR
                                           tolerance in mammals has been previously shown54. Although expression of XRCC5 in E.
                                           coli did not enhance IR tolerance, this is likely an issue with solubility of the heterologously
                                           expressed protein55 and not reflective of the importance of XRCC5 to H. exemplaris IR
                                           tolerance (Figure S5). Most animals that were injected with dsRNA targeting either XRCC5




Author Manuscript
                                           or the control gene GFP survived over a 7-day period in the absence of IR exposure
                                           (Figure 6). After exposure to IR, animals that were injected with dsRNA targeting XRCC5
                                           had reduced survival compared to the GFP-targeted controls (Figure 6). We conclude that
                                           the high levels of XRCC5 transcripts that we found in tardigrades after exposure to IR
                                           contribute to the animals’ ability to survive this stress. This result suggests that at least
                                           one of the genes we identified as strongly upregulated (enriched 315-fold, Log2FC=8.3)
                                           following IR plays a functional role in surviving IR exposure.



                                                  Curr Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 May 06.
                    Clark-Hachtel et al.                                                                                              Page 8


                       DISCUSSION




Author Manuscript
                                           We found that the tardigrade H. exemplaris experiences DNA damage upon extreme doses
                                           of IR, and that they can repair much of that damage. This is in line with other studies
                                           that have either suggested or found evidence for DNA repair having a role in tardigrade
                                           survival following other stresses, including desiccation and UV irradiation18,44,45,56,57. Our
                                           mRNA-Seq analysis revealed an unexpectedly strong upregulation of DNA repair pathway
                                           genes in response to IR, with some transcripts enriched close to 300-fold, becoming among
                                           the most-represented transcripts in the animal’s transcriptome. The repair pathways that
                                           were most affected are those most clearly implicated in repairing the types of DNA damage
                                           that would be expected following IR exposure: BER, which repairs oxidative damage and
                                           ssDNA breaks, and NHEJ, which repairs dsDNA breaks. The specificity and magnitude of
                                           this transcriptional response, along with the correlation of this response to that of bleomycin
                                           treatment, suggests that H. exemplaris has mechanisms for sensing the DNA damage caused




Author Manuscript
                                           by IR and in response, strongly increases the expression of specific DNA repair pathway
                                           genes. We found that RNAi targeting one such gene compromised the tardigrades’ ability
                                           to survive high doses of IR. We also found that strong expression of some of these DNA
                                           repair transcripts alone is sufficient to confer IR tolerance to bacteria. We conclude that
                                           H. exemplaris has an adaptive response to DNA damage-inducing radiation that is unique
                                           to date: they survive the damage at least in part by massive transcriptional upregulation of
                                           DNA repair pathway genes. Taken together, these results expand our understanding of the
                                           mechanisms that animals use to maintain DNA integrity under damaging conditions and
                                           may provide potential new routes forward to improving DNA stability in other systems.

                                           Why tardigrades have evolved strong IR tolerance is enigmatic, given that it is unlikely that
                                           tardigrades were exposed to high doses of IR in their evolutionary history. One possible




Author Manuscript
                                           explanation for their exceptional IR tolerance is that their adaptation for desiccation, a stress
                                           they likely experience frequently and can survive, has given them an ability to recognize
                                           and respond to DNA damage and hence a cross-tolerance to IR11,19. Long-term desiccation
                                           can also result in genome instability and DNA damage43,44. Although we did not see a wide-
                                           scale correlation between the transcriptomic responses to desiccation and irradiation (Figure
                                           3), we revisited these data to specifically investigate if DNA repair transcripts were enriched
                                           in response to desiccation30,31. We did see a slight enrichment in some transcripts of the
                                           BER and TMEJ pathways in H. exemplaris (Figure S5), but this enrichment was below
                                           Log2FC of 2, not nearly as strong as the enrichment observed after IR exposure. While both
                                           dried animals and animals entering desiccation did not show strong enrichment of DNA
                                           repair transcripts, it remains possible that these transcripts could be robustly expressed later,
                                           upon rehydration. It remains enigmatic why tardigrades have evolved strong IR tolerance.




Author Manuscript
                                           Additionally, there are many tardigrade species that are adapted to marine and freshwater
                                           environments and do not tolerate desiccation58. Expanding the study of IR tolerance to these
                                           desiccation-intolerant species will help us to gain a better understanding of the relationship
                                           between IR tolerance and desiccation tolerance mechanisms.

                                           Transcriptional responses to IR have been interrogated in other organisms including bacteria,
                                           Drosophila melanogaster, and human cell lines. While bacteria can upregulate DNA repair
                                           genes in response to DNA damage59, enrichment of some of these transcripts in Drosophila


                                                  Curr Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 May 06.
                    Clark-Hachtel et al.                                                                                             Page 9


                                           and humans has been found to be at a typically modest level of only 1.5–3 fold (dose of




Author Manuscript
                                           IR ranging from 2–864 Gy for Drosophila and 3–10 Gy for humans, source either X-ray or
                                           Cs137)24–29. The level to which H. exemplaris enriches these DNA repair transcripts, and the
                                           number of repair gene transcripts enriched, are by comparison far more extreme, and likely
                                           makes an important contribution to the extreme IR tolerance of some tardigrade species. We
                                           also found two histone subunits highly upregulated upon IR exposure (Table S1). Since we
                                           used poly(A) selection to isolate mRNA, these are likely to be poly(A)-containing mRNAs
                                           and hence non-cell cycle regulated histones that are typically used outside of S phase DNA
                                           replication cycles60. We speculate that these strongly upregulated histones might contribute
                                           to forming new nucleosomes after DNA repair in H. exemplaris. Additionally, we identified
                                           that the DNA repair transcripts we investigated via in situ hybridization enrich in many
                                           tissues, and with stronger enrichment in certain tissues. The tissue specificity of enrichment
                                           did not suggest to us that different tissues use different upregulated DNA repair pathways (as




Author Manuscript
                                           an example, enrichment in ovary was seen for both PCNA (BER) and XRCC5 (NHEJ)). It
                                           is currently unclear why these transcripts are enriched in a tissue-specific manner and if it is
                                           important to the ability of H. exemplaris to survive high levels of IR. A potential explanation
                                           for enrichment of these transcripts in stylet glands, claw glands, and hindgut could be
                                           that each of these tissues is involved in cuticle formation and responsible for replacing
                                           the cuticle of their respective structures upon molting49. Our protocol for irradiation and
                                           staining included the use of freshly molted adults (within 24 hours of molting) which
                                           may have selected for a time when these tissues would be relatively transcriptionally
                                           active during the molting process. Transcriptionally active regions are more susceptible
                                           to DNA damage from IR61, so potentially these tissues experience more DNA damage and
                                           upregulate the transcription of these genes disproportionately in response. However, we did
                                           not see evidence from our TUNEL experiments that these tissues experienced more damage
                                           than others throughout the body.




Author Manuscript
                                           Prior to this study, the only established mechanism of tardigrade IR tolerance was a
                                           protective mechanism that prevents damage, conferred by the R. cf. varieornatus Dsup
                                           protein15–17. Despite H. exemplaris having a Dsup protein16, the transcription of their Dsup
                                           gene does not significantly respond to IR (Log2FC of −0.57 after 500 Gy, Data S1B), and
                                           we found evidence for a response involving DNA repair genes rather than exclusively DNA
                                           protection. It is possible that the H. exemplaris Dsup does not have the same protective
                                           function as the R. cf. varieornatus Dsup due to sequence divergence16. We expressed both
                                           version of the Dsup gene in E. coli, and in this heterologous condition only the R. cf.
                                           varieornatus Dsup protein conferred IR tolerance to bacteria (Figure 5B). Dsup is limited
                                           to a few eutardigrade lineages, and even within those lineages it is unclear to what extent
                                           Dsup plays a role in IR tolerance in vivo16,18–20. Even though R. cf. varieornatus Dsup




Author Manuscript
                                           was shown to protect DNA from IR damage in HEK 293T cells, overexpression of this
                                           same protein in human neuronal cells resulted in increased DNA damage15,16,62. These
                                           discrepancies in Dsup distribution and action suggest that different tardigrade lineages have
                                           likely evolved different mechanisms for dealing with IR-related DNA damage. In support
                                           of this idea is evidence for the lack of canonical NHEJ repair in heterotardigrades18. Our
                                           results suggest that H. exemplaris may survive IR at least in part through NHEJ-mediated
                                           DNA repair. However, the heterotardigrade E. cf. sigismundi entirely lacks canonical NHEJ


                                                  Curr Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 May 06.
                    Clark-Hachtel et al.                                                                                           Page 10


                                           components18. Intriguingly this species, although radiation tolerant, has a lower LD50
                                           than H. exemplaris (1600 Gy vs 4000 Gy)19. The lack of NHEJ mechanisms in E. cf.




Author Manuscript
                                           sigismundi suggests that heterotardigrades may rely on different mechanisms for dealing
                                           with IR-related DNA damage. Recently, ongoing work identified an additional tardigrade
                                           unique protein with DNA protective abilities42. This protein (Tardigrade DNA damage
                                           Response protein, TDR1) is more widely conserved across tardigrade phylogeny compared
                                           to Dsup and possesses the ability to reduce DNA damage in human U2OS cells exposed
                                           to bleomycin42, suggesting that TDR1 is another mechanism that some tardigrades may
                                           employ to combat IR stress. The results of previous work15–19,42,63 in combination with
                                           the results of this study suggest the possibility of synergy between protective and repair
                                           mechanisms in tardigrade IR tolerance. If some tardigrades use both mechanisms, the
                                           protective mechanism could work at IR levels at which DNA damage could be prevented
                                           or slow the accumulation of damage at higher IR levels, and as damage accumulates this




Author Manuscript
                                           could activate the transcription of DNA repair pathway genes that remedy the damage.
                                           Understanding how different mechanisms of IR tolerance might work together, as well as
                                           uncovering additional tolerance mechanisms from a wider range of tardigrade species, are
                                           intriguing avenues for future research.


                       STAR METHODS
                       RESOURCE AVAILABILITY
                                           Lead contact—Further information and requests for resources and reagents should
                                           be directed to and will be fulfilled by the lead contact, Courtney Clark-Hachtel
                                           (clarkcm6@email.unc.edu)

                                           Materials availability—Plasmids used for bacterial expression experiments are available




Author Manuscript
                                           upon request.

                                           Data and code availability
                                               •        All data are available in the manuscript or the supplementary materials.
                                                        RNA sequencing data is available through NCBI Gene Expression Omnibus
                                                        (accession: GSE253471). The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been
                                                        deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE65 partner
                                                        repository with the dataset identifier PXD047724 and 10.6019/PXD047724.

                                               •        This paper does not report original code.

                                               •        Any additional information required to reanalyze the data reported in this paper
                                                        is available from the lead contact upon request.




Author Manuscript
                       EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND STUDY PARTICIPANT DETAILS
                                           Tardigrade culture—Cultures of parthenogenetic H. exemplaris (Z151) were maintained
                                           as previously described66,67. Animals were reared in 35 mm vented petri dishes (Tritech
                                           Research, T3500) with approximately 2 mL of Deer Park brand spring water and 0.5 mL
                                           Chloroccocum sp. algae (Carolina Biological Supply). Freshly molted adult females were
                                           used for all experiments.


                                                   Curr Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 May 06.
                    Clark-Hachtel et al.                                                                                             Page 11


                       METHOD DETAILS




Author Manuscript
                                           Tardigrade irradiation—Gravid animals were collected and allowed to lay embryos and
                                           molt overnight. Freshly molted animals were placed into a 1.5 mL microcentrifuge tube in
                                           100 μL of clean spring water (deer park) and then placed into a Gammator B Cs137 source
                                           gamma irradiator (current dose rate 1.4251 Gy/minute). Animals were left in the irradiator
                                           for an appropriate amount of time to reach the desired dose for each experiment (see below).

                                           Terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase dUTP nick end labeling (TUNEL)
                                           assays, imaging, and analysis—Treated animals were irradiated as described above
                                           to a dose of either 2,180 Gy (24 hours) or 4,360 Gy (48 hours). Control animals were
                                           prepared in the same way as treated animals and remained on the lab bench for the same
                                           amount of time as their treated counterparts. Upon completion of irradiation, animals were
                                           either fixed immediately for TUNEL analysis or allowed to recover for 24 hours on the




Author Manuscript
                                           laboratory bench and then fixed. At least 20 animals were prepared for each treatment
                                           (not irradiated and irradiated 0 hr, and not irradiated and irradiated 24 hr). Fixation was
                                           performed in 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA) in Phosphate-Buffered Saline (PBS) with 0.1%
                                           TritonX (0.1% PBT) overnight at 4°C. The fixative was washed out with 0.1% PBT.
                                           Animals were permeabilized by manual cutting with a syringe needle followed by sonication
                                           with a Branson Sonifier 250 probe sonicator (1 pulse, output control: 4, duty cycle: 50).
                                           The tardigrades were then transferred to a Mobicol column with 10 μm pore filter (Boca
                                           Scientific, M2210) in 0.1% PBT. Animals were subjected to a gradual methanol dehydration
                                           series from 25% to 100% methanol:0.1%PBT and left in −20°C to dehydrate overnight.
                                           Animals were gradually rehydrated from 100% to 0% methanol:0.1% PBT. The TUNEL
                                           assay protocol for tardigrades was adapted from a protocol for brine shrimp (McCarthy
                                           and Patel, personal communication) and for Drosophila melanogaster68. Briefly, tardigrades




Author Manuscript
                                           were further permeabilized by incubating in Proteinase K (10 μg/mL) for 5 min at room
                                           temperature (RT) followed by incubations in in situ detergent (30 minutes, RT, shaking),
                                           0.3% PBT Sodium deoxycholate (30 minutes, RT, shaking), and sodium citrate (1 hour,
                                           65°C, shaking). TUNEL staining was performed as in68 using the TMR red in situ cell death
                                           detection kit (Roche, 12156792910).

                                           Stained animals were mounted in DAPI fluoromount-G (Southern Biotech) with 28.41 μm
                                           mounting beads (whitehouse scientific). Animals were imaged on a Zeiss 880 LSM with fast
                                           Airyscan detector. At least 9 individuals were imaged from each treatment for downstream
                                           analysis. 3D z-stacks were processed with FIJI69 and saved as separated channel .tif files
                                           for processing in CellProfiler70. Nuclei were segmented following the 3D segmentation of
                                           cell monolayer tutorial (tutorials.cellprofiler.org) through the “resize objects” as nuclei step.
                                           The mean intensity of TUNEL signal per nucleus was calculated in CellProfiler using the




Author Manuscript
                                           “measure object intensity” module on identified nuclei in CellProfiler70. Nuclear TUNEL
                                           intensity measurements were exported and the average “mean intensity” value was used for
                                           downstream analysis. Nuclear TUNEL intensity values were normalized to the mean of the
                                           not irradiated 0 hr samples for each experiment.

                                           Tardigrade bleomycin treatment and survival analysis—Bleomycin sulphate
                                           powder (Sigma BP971) was resuspended to a concentration of 100 mg/mL in spring


                                                  Curr Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 May 06.
                    Clark-Hachtel et al.                                                                                         Page 12


                                           water and then serially diluted in spring water to make additional working solutions of




Author Manuscript
                                           10 mg/mL, 1 mg/mL, 100 μg/mL, and 10 μg/mL. Gravid animals were collected and allowed
                                           to lay embryos and molt overnight. Freshly molted animals were placed into a 1.5 mL
                                           microcentrifuge tube in spring water. The spring water was removed and replaced with
                                           bleomycin solution in spring water at the desired concentration. Animals were soaked in the
                                           bleomycin solution or plain spring water (controls) for 24 hours in sealed microcentrifuge
                                           tubes. Three trials of 10–20 animals each were performed for each dose of bleomycin (and
                                           control). After treatment, animals were rinsed with clean spring water five times before
                                           being moved to 96-well plates with one animal/well filled with 100 μL spring water (Deer
                                           Park brand) and ~5 μL of Chloroccocum algae (Carolina Biological Supply). Survival and
                                           egg laying was checked approximately daily and the individuals in each well of the 96-well
                                           plate were scored as alive (movement detected) or dead (movement not detected) over the
                                           course of 7 days to monitor survival. On day 7 adults were removed from the wells, and




Author Manuscript
                                           wells were monitored for an additional 6 days for egg hatching (normal developmental time
                                           for H. exemplaris is 4.5 days67). Laying is reported as the percent of observed animals that
                                           laid clutches and hatching is reported as the percent of observed laying animals that had
                                           viable clutches (Figure S1).

                                           RNA sequencing—Approximately 200 adult animals were used for each replicate (IR
                                           experiment: 3 replicates each of unirradiated, 100 Gy, 500 Gy, and 2,180 Gy; bleomycin
                                           experiment: 3 replicates each of 1 mg/mL, 100 μg/mL, 10 μg/mL). For IR, animals
                                           were exposed to an appropriate dose of IR (or left on the lab bench for 24 hours,
                                           unirradiated). For bleomycin experiments, animals were soaked in the desired concentration
                                           of bleomycin:spring water or spring water (controls) for 24 hours. For both experiments,
                                           RNA was isolated immediately from each replicate using the PicoPure RNA isolation
                                           kit (Applied Biosystems) following slightly modified manufacturer instructions. Libraries




Author Manuscript
                                           were constructed using the KAPA mRNA stranded library prep kit and fragmented to
                                           ~300bp. Paired end sequencing (2 × 50bp) was performed using the Illumina NextSeq2000
                                           platform. Reads were adapter trimmed then mapped to the most recent genome for H.
                                           exemplaris (v3.1.5) using BBduk and BBmap (ver 39.01), and counts were assigned with
                                           featureCounts71 (ver 2.0.6) using the annotation file associated with this genome. Reads
                                           were aggregated at the level of genes and only genes with more than one count in at
                                           least two samples were kept for differential expression analysis. Transcript abundance, fold
                                           changes, and FDR values were determined using EdgeR (Data S1B and S1C)72. For GO
                                           term analysis, Trinotate73 ver 4.0.2 was used with default parameters, with terms parsed
                                           from the Pfam results column using a custom Python script.

                                           Protein extraction and mass spectrometry analysis—Approximately 10,000




Author Manuscript
                                           tardigrades were collected per sample (3 replicates each of untreated, irradiated with 500
                                           Gy and left to recover for 6hr, and irradiated with 500 Gy and left to recover for 18hr).
                                           Following recovery, animals were ultrasonicated in 500 μL 20 mM HEPES using a Covaris
                                           E220 Focused-ultrasonicator for four 1-minute rounds at 150 W, 15% duty cycle, and 250
                                           cycles/burst at 4°C. Samples were clarified, and proteins were precipitated using 100 mM
                                           ammonium acetate in methanol. Pellets were resuspended in 4 M urea in 100 mM Tris-HCl
                                           pH 7.2. For each sample, 30 μg of protein were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT),


                                                  Curr Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 May 06.
                    Clark-Hachtel et al.                                                                                         Page 13


                                           alkylated with 30 mM iodoacetamide (IAM), and precipitated using 100 mM ammonium




Author Manuscript
                                           acetate in methanol. Proteins were resuspended in 2 M urea in 100 mM Tris-HCl pH
                                           7.2 and digested overnight (>16hr) using 1 μg of Trypsin Gold (Promega) at 37°C. High
                                           pH reversed-phase offline fractionation was performed using 20 mM ammonium formate
                                           pH 10 in water as mobile phase A and 100% acetonitrile as mobile phase B. Samples
                                           (400 μL) were injected onto an XBridge™ Peptide BEH C18 column (300 Å, 2.5 μm,
                                           3.0 × 100 mm; Waters) and were separated over a 75 min linear gradient using a 300
                                           μL/min flow rate. Fractions were collected starting at 10 min in 6-min intervals up until
                                           46 min, yielding 6 total fractions. For each sample, the first and second fractions and
                                           fifth and sixth fractions were combined, giving four total fractions per sample. Fractions
                                           were then desalted using C18 ZipTips (Millipore Sigma). Fractions were analyzed using
                                           a nanoAcquity UPLC (Waters) coupled to a Q Exactive HF-X (Thermo Fisher Scientific).
                                           Mobile phase A consisted of 0.1% FA in water, and mobile phase B consisted of 0.1% FA




Author Manuscript
                                           in acetonitrile. Fractions were injected (4 μL) onto a Symmetry C18 Trap Column (100 Å,
                                           5 μm, 180 μm × 20 mm; Waters). Trapping occurred for 3min at a 5 μL/min flow rate at
                                           99% mobile phase A and 1% mobile phase B. Peptides were then separated using a HSS T3
                                           C18 column (1.8 μm, 75 μm × 250 mm; Waters) using a 2 hr method at 300 nL/min. Mass
                                           spectrometry analysis occurred in a data dependent manner, with survey scans collected over
                                           a 350–2000 m/z range at 120,000 resolving power. Fragmentation scans for the top 20 ions
                                           within a survey scan were acquired with a normalized collision energy set at 28 over a
                                           200–2000 m/z range at 30,000 resolving power.

                                           Proteomics database searching and protein quantification—Raw files from the
                                           same fractions across replicates and conditions were imported into Progenesis QI for
                                           Proteomics (Nonlinear Dynamics, version 4.2) for peak picking and alignment. For example,
                                           Fraction 1 from the Untreated, Irradiated 6hr recovery, and Irradiated 18hr recovery




Author Manuscript
                                           across all biological replicates were processed together. A combined peak list (.mgf)
                                           containing all fragmentation spectra for each feature m/z was exported for peptide sequence
                                           identification using Mascot (Matrix Science, version 2.5.1). Database searching was
                                           performed against the H. exemplaris UniProt proteome (https://www.uniprot.org/uniprotkb?
                                           query=(taxonomy_id:2072580) and sequences for common laboratory contaminants (https://
                                           www.thegpm.org/crap/,116 sequences). MS/MS data were searched using precursor/product
                                           ion tolerances of 15 ppm/0.02 Da, trypsin specificity with two possible mixed cleavages,
                                           fixed cysteine carbamidomethylation, and variable modifications of methionine oxidation
                                           and N-terminus acetylation. Identified peptides were analyzed in custom scripts written
                                           in R (https://github.com/hickslab/QuantifyR). For peptides that were identified in multiple
                                           fractions from the same replicate, the abundances were summed to give a total peptide
                                           abundance for that sample. Due to the possibility of missing values from offline




Author Manuscript
                                           fractionation affecting protein-level quantification within the experiment, peptides that had
                                           a coefficient of variation >0.40 in all conditions were removed from subsequent analysis.
                                           Protein quantification was achieved using a Hi-3 method74. Peptide abundances across all
                                           conditions were averaged. The three peptides with the highest averages for each protein were
                                           then used for protein quantification. Using the most abundant peptides across conditions
                                           as described, the three peptide abundances were averaged for the individual replicates to
                                           obtain a representative protein abundance for each protein detected in each sample. Proteins


                                                  Curr Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 May 06.
                    Clark-Hachtel et al.                                                                                          Page 14


                                           that did not have at least 2 unique peptides identified were removed from further analysis.




Author Manuscript
                                           Proteins that did not have one condition with >50% nonzero values from the determined
                                           protein abundance were also removed from further analysis.

                                           Gene homolog identification and cloning—Homologs of canonical DNA repair
                                           proteins of H. exemplaris were identified in a previous study18 and updated to the current
                                           genome annotation (v3.1.5) using BLAST P. The homology of these proteins to their
                                           presumed DNA repair proteins was also confirmed by reciprocal BLAST to human and
                                           Drosophila melanogaster protein databases. A putative H. exemplaris Dsup protein was
                                           previously identified in16. H. exemplaris POLQ was identified via BLAST P using human
                                           POLQ protein (NP_955452.3) as a query and confirmed via reciprocal BLAST. BARD1-like
                                           and BARD1-like C-terminal domain were identified via reciprocal BLAST. The partial
                                           Ku70 protein that is enriched upon exposure to IR (BV898_07145) was identified via an
                                           NCBI Domain search on the putative protein. This protein is predicted to only contain the




Author Manuscript
                                           N-terminal portion of Ku70 and lacks the domains responsible for interaction with Ku80
                                           and DNA34. Based on homolog transcript sequence, primers were designed to clone the
                                           full-length transcript from tardigrade cDNA or from GBlock synthesized gene fragments
                                           (IDT: Rv Dsup, He Dsup, and RAD51). Primers were designed with a 30bp overlap with
                                           the pDest17 expression vector (Invitrogen: 11803012) for subsequent incorporation into this
                                           vector via Gibson assembly.

                                           in situ hybridization and expression scoring—Templates for in situ hybridization
                                           probes were amplified from vectors containing the full-length gene using the primers listed
                                           in Table S5. Antisense RNA probes for in situ were synthesized as previously described75,76,
                                           purified using an RNA clean and concentrator kit (Zymo, R1015), and eluted in RNAse free
                                           water. The final concentration of probes for in situ reactions was 0.5 μg/mL as previously




Author Manuscript
                                           recommended76.

                                           Tardigrades for in situ expression analysis were exposed to a dose of 100 Gy IR and fixed
                                           immediately for in situ hybridization in 4% PFA in PBS with 0.1% Tween20 (0.1% PTW)
                                           overnight at 4°C77. Controls were left on the lab bench for the equivalent amount of time.
                                           Fluorescent in situ hybridization was performed in adults as previously described77. At
                                           least two replicates with 10 animals each were performed for each DNA repair transcript
                                           analyzed for both irradiated and control experiments. Animals were mounted with DAPI
                                           fluoromount-G (Southern Biotech) with 28.41 μm mounting beads (whitehouse scientific)
                                           and imaged on a Zeiss 880 LSM with fast Airyscan detector.

                                           in situ hybridization expression profiles were examined in detail for at least 3 control and




Author Manuscript
                                           3 treated individuals for each DNA repair transcript that we examined. Individuals were
                                           imaged at both lower laser power (appropriate setting for tissues with high expression) and
                                           higher laser power (to facilitate the observation of expression in tissues with lower levels
                                           of expression). Tissues were identified based on morphological analysis and informed by48.
                                           Expression in each structure was scored from the higher laser power images on a scale from
                                           0 (no observed expression) to 3 (observed oversaturated expression). A score of 1 indicates
                                           minimally observed expression and 2 indicates slightly undersaturated observed expression.



                                                  Curr Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 May 06.
                    Clark-Hachtel et al.                                                                                           Page 15


                                           Each tissue was scored within an individual and then a mean expression score for each tissue




Author Manuscript
                                           was calculated by averaging the tissue scores across individuals (Figure S4).

                                           Bacterial protein expression and irradiation—pDest17 vectors containing full-length
                                           versions of individual tardigrade DNA repair transcripts were expressed in E. coli BL21 AI
                                           cells (Invitrogen, C607003) to determine if heterologous expression could confer tolerance
                                           to IR. The sequence of the expression vectors was confirmed before transformation into
                                           BL21 AI cells. Bacteria were grown overnight in 5 mL LB with Ampicillin and diluted
                                           1:20 into LB with Ampicillin and 0.2% L-arabinose to induce expression from the pDest17
                                           vector. Cultures were induced for 4 hours at 37°C while shaking. After 4 hours the OD600
                                           of the cultures was measured. Induced cultures of bacteria expressing each DNA repair
                                           transcript were split into two 1.5 mL microcentrifuge tubes and densities were normalized
                                           by dilution into 1 mL total culture. Treated bacteria were exposed to a dose of 2,180 Gy
                                           IR while their control counterparts remained on the laboratory bench, both under continual




Author Manuscript
                                           induction. After treatment, A dilution series of both treated and untreated bacteria was plated
                                           to determine the number of colony forming units (cfu). Percent survival was calculated as
                                           the cfu after irradiation divided by the cfu for untreated cells expressing the same DNA
                                           repair component.

                                           Analysis of heterologous protein expression in bacteria—Expression of protein
                                           in bacteria was analyzed by SDS-PAGE. Following the same induction protocol as used for
                                           irradiation experiments (see above), bacteria were pelleted by centrifugation, resuspended
                                           in 200 μL 0.85% NaCl, and lysed with a Branson Sonifier 250 probe sonicator (30
                                           pulses, output control: 5, duty cycle: 50%). The soluble fraction of lysate was isolated by
                                           centrifuging at 14,000 rpm for 10 minutes at 4°C and retaining only the supernatant. Protein
                                           concentrations were quantified with Bio-Rad protein assay (Bio-Rad, 5000006).




Author Manuscript
                                           Protein (2 μg total lysate, 5 μg soluble lysate) was loaded onto 4–12% Bis-Tris NuPAGE
                                           minigels (Invitrogen, NP0322BOX). 10 μL of precision plus protein kaleidoscope prestained
                                           standard (Bio-Rad, Cat#1610375) was included as a standard on each gel. Gels were run in
                                           1x NuPAGE MOPS SDS running buffer (Invitrogen, NP0001) at 140 V for 75 minutes. Gels
                                           were stained in Coomassie and destained in a solution of 5:4:1 water:methanol:acetic acid
                                           before imaging (Figure S5). The expected molecular weights of proteins that are reported
                                           were computed with the Expasy Compute pI/Mw tool78.

                                           dsRNA synthesis and injection—DNA templates for synthesis of double-stranded
                                           RNA (dsRNA) for XRCC5 and GFP were amplified using the primers indicated in Table
                                           S5. dsRNA for both XRCC5 and GFP were synthesized as previously described30, purified




Author Manuscript
                                           by isopropanol precipitation, and eluted in RNAse free water. dsRNA was diluted to a
                                           concentration of 1μg/uL in RNAse free water for injection. Gravid females for injection
                                           were isolated and allowed to lay eggs and molt overnight prior to injection. Adult
                                           tardigrades were injected with dsRNA targeting either XRCC5 or GFP as previously
                                           described53,79.

                                           RNAi Survival assays—Following injection with dsRNA targeting either XRCC5 or
                                           GFP animals were allowed to recover overnight. After recovery, animals injected with either


                                                  Curr Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 May 06.
                    Clark-Hachtel et al.                                                                                                          Page 16


                                           dsRNA were divided into two groups and placed into 1.5 mL microcentrifuge tubes. One




Author Manuscript
                                           group was exposed to 2,180 Gy IR and the other was left on the laboratory bench for an
                                           equivalent amount of time (24 hours). After treatment, animals were collected and placed
                                           into a 96-well plate with one animal/well filled with 100 μL spring water (Deer Park
                                           brand) and ~5 μL of Chloroccocum algae (Carolina Biological Supply). IR exposure did
                                           cause some lethality on day 0 (the day animals were removed from the irradiator) in some
                                           groups (Figure 6). These animals were still transferred to 96-well plates along with surviving
                                           animals. Survival was checked approximately daily and the individuals in each well of the
                                           96-well plate were scored as alive (movement detected) or dead (movement not detected)
                                           over the course of 7 days.

                       QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
                                           For the TUNEL experiments a one-way ANOVA followed by a post-hoc Dunnett test to the




Author Manuscript
                                           mean of the irradiated timepoint 0 for each experiment was used to determine significant
                                           differences between treatment groups (Prism). All statistical analyses for mRNAseq were
                                           performed using EdgeR (Transcript abundance, fold changes, p- and FDR values)(Data S1B
                                           and S1C)72. Pearson correlation tests were run in R80 to evaluate the correlation between
                                           mRNAseq libraries from different stresses. For differential global proteomic analysis,
                                           statistical analysis was performed using a two-sided student’s t-test with a Benjamini and
                                           Hochberg (BH) method used for p-value correction81. Fold change was calculated by the
                                           difference of mean abundance values for each protein across conditions. Only observations
                                           with an FDR <0.05 and a Log2FC ≥1 were considered statistically significantly different. In
                                           the bacterial expression experiments, the percent survival was log transformed to standardize
                                           variance for statistical analysis as previously described82. A one-way ANOVA followed by
                                           a post-hoc Dunnett test to the means of the control groups (empty and GFP) was then used




Author Manuscript
                                           to determine significant improvement in survival relative to controls following IR exposure
                                           (Prism). The survival data for RNAi assays was converted to survival curves in Prism and
                                           subjected to Kaplan-Meier simple survival analysis to determine significant differences in
                                           survival between groups (Figure 6). All statistical details for reported experiments can be
                                           found in the associated Figure and Figure legend.


                       Supplementary Material
                                           Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.


                       ACKNOWLEDGMENTS:
                                           We thank Nipam Patel and Jenny McCarthy for assistance with the adaptation of TUNEL protocols for tardigrades,
                                           the UNC High Throughput Sequencing Facility and the UNC Biology Microscopy Core for technical assistance,




Author Manuscript
                                           Dale Ramsden, Aziz Sancar, Greg Matera, Tom Petes, Corbin Jones, Hemant Kelkar, Dan Janies, and members
                                           of the Ramsden and Goldstein labs for helpful feedback and discussions, and Adriana Schlachter for assistance
                                           with the CellProfiler analysis. This work was supported by NSF grant IOS 2028860 to BG and MCB 2149172
                                           to LMH. JDH was supported by the NIH (F32GM131577) and ERS was supported by the NSF Graduate
                                           Research Fellowship progam. The Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer was funded via an NSF Major Research
                                           Instrumentation award (CHE-1726291).




                                                   Curr Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 May 06.
                    Clark-Hachtel et al.                                                                                                   Page 17


                       REFERENCES




Author Manuscript
                                           1. Boothby TC (2019). Mechanisms and evolution of resistance to environmental extremes in animals.
                                              Evodevo 10, 30. 10.1186/s13227-019-0143-4. [PubMed: 31827759]
                                           2. Teets NM, Gantz JD, and Kawarasaki Y (2020). Rapid cold hardening: ecological relevance,
                                              physiological mechanisms and new perspectives. J. Exp. Biol 223, jeb203448. 10.1242/jeb.203448.
                                              [PubMed: 32051174]
                                           3. Schulte PM (2014). What is environmental stress? Insights from fish living in a variable
                                              environment. J. Exp. Biol 217, 23–34. 10.1242/jeb.089722. [PubMed: 24353201]
                                           4. Shaikhutdinov N, and Gusev O (2022). Chironomid midges (Diptera) provide insights into genome
                                              evolution in extreme environments. Curr. Opin. Insect Sci 49, 101–107. [PubMed: 34990872]
                                           5. Møbjerg N, Halberg KA, Jørgensen A, Persson D, Bjørn M, Ramløv H, and Kristensen RM (2011).
                                              Survival in extreme environments - on the current knowledge of adaptations in tardigrades. Acta
                                              Physiol. (Oxf) 202, 409–420. 10.1111/j.1748-1716.2011.02252.x. [PubMed: 21251237]
                                           6. Møbjerg N, and Neves RC (2021). New insights into survival strategies of tardigrades. Comp.
                                              Biochem. Physiol. A. Mol. Integr. Physiol 254, 110890. [PubMed: 33373690]




Author Manuscript
                                           7. Hibshman JD, Clegg JS, and Goldstein B (2020). Mechanisms of Desiccation Tolerance: Themes
                                              and Variations in Brine Shrimp, Roundworms, and Tardigrades. Front. Physiol 11, 592016. 10.3389/
                                              fphys.2020.592016. [PubMed: 33192606]
                                           8. Schill RO, and Hengherr S (2018). Environmental Adaptations: Desiccation Tolerance. In Water
                                              Bears: The Biology of Tardigrades, Schill RO, ed. (Springer Nature Switzerland), pp. 273–294.
                                           9. Hengherr S, and Schill RO (2018). Environmental Adaptations: Cryobiosis. In Water Bears: The
                                              Biology of Tardigrades, Schill RO, ed. (Springer Nature Switzerland), pp. 295–310.
                                           10. Guidetti R, Rizzo AM, Altiero T, and Rebecchi L (2012). What can we learn from the toughest
                                               animals of the Earth? Water bears (tardigrades) as multicellular model organisms in order to
                                               perform scientific preparations for lunar exploration. Planet. Space Sci 74, 97–102. 10.1016/
                                               j.pss.2012.05.021.
                                           11. Jönsson KI (2019). Radiation Tolerance in Tardigrades: Current Knowledge and Potential
                                               Applications in Medicine. Cancers (Basel). 11, 1333. [PubMed: 31505739]
                                           12. Bolus NE (2001). Basic review of radiation biology and terminology. J Nucl Med Technol 29,




Author Manuscript
                                               67–73. [PubMed: 11376098]
                                           13. Beltrán-Pardo E, Jönsson KI, Harms-Ringdahl M, Haghdoost S, and Wojcik A (2015). Tolerance to
                                               Gamma Radiation in the Tardigrade Hypsibius dujardini from Embryo to Adult Correlate Inversely
                                               with Cellular Proliferation. PLoS One 10, e0133658. 10.5061/dryad.50r1b. [PubMed: 26208275]
                                           14. Steel GG (1996). From targets to genes: a brief history of radiosensitivity. Phys. Med. Biol 41,
                                               205–222. [PubMed: 8746105]
                                           15. Hashimoto T, Horikawa DD, Saito Y, Kuwahara H, Kozuka-Hata H, Shin-I T, Minakuchi Y,
                                               Ohishi K, Motoyama A, Aizu T, et al. (2016). Extremotolerant tardigrade genome and improved
                                               radiotolerance of human cultured cells by tardigrade-unique protein. Nat. Commun 7, 12808.
                                               10.1038/ncomms12808. [PubMed: 27649274]
                                           16. Hashimoto T, and Kunieda T (2017). DNA Protection Protein, a Novel Mechanism of Radiation
                                               Tolerance: Lessons from Tardigrades. Life 7, 26. 10.3390/life7020026. [PubMed: 28617314]
                                           17. Chavez C, Cruz-Becerra G, Fei J, Kassavetis GA, and Kadonaga JT (2019). The tardigrade
                                               damage suppressor protein binds to nucleosomes and protects DNA from hydroxyl radicals. Elife
                                               8, e47682. [PubMed: 31571581]




Author Manuscript
                                           18. Kamilari M, Jørgensen A, Schiøtt M, and Møbjerg N (2019). Comparative transcriptomics suggest
                                               unique molecular adaptations within tardigrade lineages. BMC Genomics 20, 607. [PubMed:
                                               31340759]
                                           19. Jönsson KI, Hygum TL, Andersen KN, Clausen LKB, and Møbjerg N (2016). Tolerance to gamma
                                               radiation in the marine heterotardigrade, Echiniscoides sigismundi. PLoS One 11, e0168884.
                                               10.1371/journal.pone.0168884. [PubMed: 27997621]
                                           20. Murai Y, Yagi-Utsumi M, Fujiwara M, Tanaka S, Tomita M, Kato K, and Arakawa K (2021).
                                               Multiomics study of a heterotardigrade, Echinisicus testudo, suggests the possibility of convergent



                                                  Curr Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 May 06.
                    Clark-Hachtel et al.                                                                                                   Page 18


                                               evolution of abundant heat-soluble proteins in Tardigrada. BMC Genomics 22, 813. 10.1186/
                                               s12864-021-08131-x. [PubMed: 34763673]




Author Manuscript
                                           21. Kumari S, Rastogi RP, Singh KL, Singh SP, and Sinha RP (2008). DNA Damage: Detection
                                               Strategies. EXCLI J. 7, 44–62.
                                           22. Ciccia A, and Elledge SJ (2010). The DNA Damage Response: Making It Safe to Play with
                                               Knives. Mol. Cell 40, 179–204. 10.1016/j.molcel.2010.09.019. [PubMed: 20965415]
                                           23. Rashi-Elkeles S, Warnatz H-J, Elkon R, Kupershtein A, Chobod Y, Paz A, Amstislavskiy V,
                                               Sultan M, Safer H, Nietfeld W, et al. (2014). Parallel profiling of the transcriptome, cistrome,
                                               and epigenome in the cellular response to ionizing radiation. Sci. Signal 7, rs3. 10.1126/
                                               scisignal.2005032. [PubMed: 24825921]
                                           24. Narayanan IV, Paulsen MT, Bedi K, Berg N, Ljungman EA, Francia S, Veloso A, Magnuson B,
                                               di Fagagna FD, Wilson TE, et al. (2017). Transcriptional and post-transcriptional regulation of the
                                               ionizing radiation response by ATM and p53. Sci. Rep 7, 43598. 10.1038/srep43598. [PubMed:
                                               28256581]
                                           25. Jen K-Y, and Cheung VG (2003). Transcriptional response of lymphoblastoid cells to ionizing
                                               radiation. Genome Res. 13, 2092–2100. 10.1101/gr.1240103. [PubMed: 12915489]




Author Manuscript
                                           26. Bouten RM, Dalgard CL, Soltis AR, Slaven JE, and Day RM (2021). Transcriptomic profiling
                                               and pathway analysis of cultured human lunch microvascular endothelial cells following ionizing
                                               radiation exposure. Sci. Rep 11, 24214. [PubMed: 34930946]
                                           27. van Bergeijk P, Heimiller J, Uyetake L, and Su TT (2012). Genome-wide expression analysis
                                               identifies a modulator of ionizing radiation-induced p53-independent apoptosis in Drosophila
                                               melanogaster. PLoS One 7, e36539. 10.1371/journal.pone.0036539. [PubMed: 22666323]
                                           28. Moskalev A, Zhikrivetskaya S, Krasnov G, Shaposhnikov M, Proshkina E, Borisoglebsky D,
                                               Danilov A, Peregudova D, Sharapova I, Dobrovolskaya E, et al. (2015). A comparison of the
                                               transcriptome of Drosophila melanogaster in response to entomopathogenic fungus, ionizing
                                               radiation, starvation and cold shock. BMC Genomics 16, S8. 10.1186/1471-2164-16-S13-S8.
                                           29. Rieger KE, and Chu G (2004). Portrait of transcriptional responses to ultraviolet and ionizing
                                               radiation in human cells. Nucleic Acids Res. 32, 4786–4803. 10.1093/nar/gkh783. [PubMed:
                                               15356296]
                                           30. Boothby TC, Tapia H, Brozena AH, Pielak GJ, Koshland D, and Goldstein B (2017). Tardigrades
                                               use intrinsically disordered proteins to survive desiccation. Mol. Cell 65, 975–984. 10.1016/




Author Manuscript
                                               j.molcel.2017.02.018. [PubMed: 28306513]
                                           31. Hibshman JD, Carra S, and Goldstein B (2023). Tardigrade small heat shock proteins can limit
                                               desiccation-induced protein aggregation. Commun. Biol 6, 121. [PubMed: 36717706]
                                           32. Yoshida Y, Koutsovoulos G, Laetsch DR, Stevens L, Kumar S, Horikawa DD, Ishino K, Komine S,
                                               Kunieda T, Tomita M, et al. (2017). Comparative genomics of the tardigrades Hypsibius dujardini
                                               and Ramazzottius varieornatus. PLoS Biol. 15, e2002266. 10.1371/journal.pbio.2002266.
                                               [PubMed: 28749982]
                                           33. Kondo K, Kubo T, and Kunieda T (2015). Suggested Involvement of PP1/PP2A Activity and
                                               De Novo Gene Expression in Anhydrobiotic Survival in a Tardigrade, Hypsibius dujardini, by
                                               Chemical Genetic Approach. PLoS One 10, e0144803. 10.1371/journal.pone.0144803. [PubMed:
                                               26690982]
                                           34. Rivera-Calzada A, Spagnolo L, Pearl LH, and Llorca O (2007). Structural model of full-length
                                               human Ku70–Ku80 heterodimer and its recognition of DNA and DNA-PKcs. EMBO Rep. 8,
                                               56–62. 10.1038/sj.embor.7400847. [PubMed: 17159921]




Author Manuscript
                                           35. Yu Z, Chen J, Ford BN, Brackley ME, and Glickman BW (1999). Human DNA repair systems: An
                                               overview. Environ. Mol. Mutagen 33, 3–20. [PubMed: 10037319]
                                           36. Dizdaroglu M (1992). Measurement of radiation-induced damage to DNA at the molecular level.
                                               Int. J. Radiat. Biol 61, 175–183. [PubMed: 1351904]
                                           37. Demple B, and Harrison L (1994). Repair of Oxidative Damage to DNA: Enzymology and
                                               Biology. Annu. Rev. Biochem 63, 915–948. [PubMed: 7979257]
                                           38. Reid DA, Keegan S, Leo-Macias A, Watanabe G, Strande NT, Chang HH, Oksuz BA, Fenyo
                                               D, Lieber MR, Ramsden DA, et al. (2015). Organization and dynamics of the nonhomologous



                                                  Curr Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 May 06.
                    Clark-Hachtel et al.                                                                                                   Page 19


                                               end-joining machinery during DNA double-strand break repair. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A 112,
                                               E2575–84. 10.1073/pnas.1420115112. [PubMed: 25941401]




Author Manuscript
                                           39. Wood RD, and Doublié S (2022). Genome Protection by DNA Polymerase θ. Annu. Rev. Genet
                                               56, 207–228. [PubMed: 36028228]
                                           40. Ramsden DA, Carvajal-Garcia J, and Gupta GP (2022). Mechanism, cellular functions and cancer
                                               roles of polymerase-theta-mediated DNA end joining. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol 23, 125–140.
                                               10.1038/s41580-021-00405-2. [PubMed: 34522048]
                                           41. Rodgers K, and McVey M (2016). Error-prone repair of DNA double-strand breaks. J. Cell Physiol
                                               231, 15–24. 10.1002/jcp.25053. [PubMed: 26033759]
                                           42. Anoud M, Delagoutte E, Helleu Q, Brion A, Duvernois-Berthet E, As M, Marques X, Lamribet
                                               K, Senamaud C, Jourdren L, et al. (2024). Comparative transcriptomics reveal a novel tardigrade
                                               specific DNA binding protein induced in response to ionizing radiation. Elife 13, RP92621.
                                               10.7554/eLife.92621.1.
                                           43. Gusev O, Nakahara Y, Vanyagina V, Malutina L, Cornette R, Sakashita T, Hamada N, Kikawada
                                               T, Kobayashi Y, and Okuda T (2010). Anhydrobiosis-associated nuclear DNA damage and
                                               repair in the sleeping chironomid: Linkage with radioresistance. PLoS One 5, e14008. 10.1371/




Author Manuscript
                                               journal.pone.0014008. [PubMed: 21103355]
                                           44. Neumann S, Reuner A, Brümmer F, and Schill RO (2009). DNA damage in storage cells
                                               of anhydrobiotic tardigrades. Comp. Biochem. Physiol. A Mol. Integr. Physiol 153, 425–429.
                                               10.1016/j.cbpa.2009.04.611. [PubMed: 19361569]
                                           45. Yoshida Y, Satoh T, Ota C, Tanaka S, Horikawa DD, Tomita M, Kato K, and Arakawa K (2022).
                                               Time-series transcriptomic screening of factors contributing to the cross-tolerance to UV radiation
                                               and anhydrobiosis in tardigrades. BMC Genomics 23, 405. 10.1186/s12864-022-08642-1.
                                               [PubMed: 35643424]
                                           46. Bolzán AD, and Bianchi MS (2018). DNA and chromosome damage induced by bleomycin
                                               in mammalian cells: An update. Mutat. Res. Rev. Mutat. Res 775, 51–62. 10.1016/
                                               j.mrrev.2018.02.003. [PubMed: 29555029]
                                           47. Kciuk M, Marciniak B, Mojzych M, and Kontek R (2020). Focus on UV-induced DNA Damage
                                               and Repair—Disease Relevance and Protective Strategies. Int. J. Mol. Sci 21, 7264. 10.3390/
                                               ijms21197264. [PubMed: 33019598]
                                           48. Gross V, Müller M, Hehn L, Ferstl S, Allner S, Dierolf M, Achterhold K, Mayer G, and Pfeiffer F




Author Manuscript
                                               (2019). X-ray imaging of a water bear offers a new look at tardigrade internal anatomy. Zool. Lett
                                               5, 14. 10.1186/s40851-019-0130-6.
                                           49. Møbjerg N, Jørgensen A, Kristensen RM, and Neves RC (2019). Morphology and Functional
                                               Anatomy. In Water Bears: The Biology of Tardigrades, pp. 57–94.
                                           50. Kumagai H, Kondo K, and Kunieda T (2022). Application of CRISPR/Cas9 system and the
                                               preferred no-indel end-joining repair in tardigrades. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun 623, 196–
                                               201. 10.1016/j.bbrc.2022.07.060. [PubMed: 35926276]
                                           51. Aihara H, Ito Y, Kurumizaka H, Yokoyama S, and Shibata T (1999). The N-terminal domain of the
                                               human Rad51 protein binds DNA: Structure and a DNA binding surface as revealed by NMR. J.
                                               Mol. Biol 290, 495–504. 10.1006/jmbi.1999.2904. [PubMed: 10390347]
                                           52. Ghodke H, Paudel BP, Lewis JS, Jergic S, Gopal K, Romero ZJ, Wood EA, Woodgate R, Cox
                                               MM, and van Oijen AM (2019). Spatial and temporal organization of RecA in the Escherichia coli
                                               DNA-damage response. Elife 8, e42761. 10.7554/eLife.42761. [PubMed: 30717823]
                                           53. Tenlen JR, McCaskill S, and Goldstein B (2013). RNA interference can be used to disrupt gene




Author Manuscript
                                               function in tardigrades. Dev. Genes Evol 223, 171–181. 10.1007/s00427-012-0432-6. [PubMed:
                                               23187800]
                                           54. Nussenzweig A, Sokol K, Burgman P, Li L, and Li GC (1997). Hypersensitivity of Ku80-deficient
                                               cell lines and mice to DNA damage: The effects of ionizing radiation on growth, survival,
                                               and development. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A 94, 13588–13593. 10.1073/pnas.94.25.13588.
                                               [PubMed: 9391070]
                                           55. Hanakahi LA (2007). 2-step purification of the Ku DNA repair protein expressed in Escherichia
                                               coli. Protein Expr. Purif 52, 139–145. [PubMed: 17110127]




                                                  Curr Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 May 06.
                    Clark-Hachtel et al.                                                                                                   Page 20


                                           56. Förster F, Beisser D, Grohme MA, Liang C, Mali B, Siegl AM, Engelmann JC, Shkumatov
                                               AV, Schokraie E, Müller T, et al. (2012). Transcriptome analysis in tardigrade species reveals




Author Manuscript
                                               specific molecular pathways for stress adaptations. Bioinform. Biol. Insights 6, 69–96. 10.4137/
                                               BBI.S9150. [PubMed: 22563243]
                                           57. Horikawa DD, Cumbers J, Sakakibara I, Rogoff D, Leuko S, Harnoto R, and Arakawa K (2013).
                                               Analysis of DNA repair and protection in the Tardigrade Ramazzottius varieornatus and Hypsibius
                                               dujardini after exposure to UVC radiation. PLoS One 8, e64793. 10.1371/journal.pone.0064793.
                                               [PubMed: 23762256]
                                           58. Guidetti R, Altiero T, and Rebecchi L (2011). On dormancy strategies in tardigrades. J. Insect
                                               Physiol 57, 567–576. 10.1016/j.jinsphys.2011.03.003. [PubMed: 21402076]
                                           59. Maslowska KH, Makiela-Dzbenska K, and Fijalkowska IJ (2019). The SOS System: A Complex
                                               and Tightly Regulated Response to DNA Damage. Environ. Mol. Mutagen 60, 368–384. [PubMed:
                                               30447030]
                                           60. Talbert PB, and Henikoff S (2017). Histone variants on the move: substrates for chromatin
                                               dynamics. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol 18, 115–126. 10.1038/nrm.2016.148. [PubMed: 27924075]
                                           61. Zheng Y, Li H, Bo X, and Chen H (2023). Ionizing radiation damage and repair from 3D-genomic




Author Manuscript
                                               perspective. Trends Genet. 39, 1–4. [PubMed: 35934594]
                                           62. Escarcega RD, Patil AA, Meyer MD, Moruno-Manchon JF, Silvagnoli AD, McCullough LD, and
                                               Tsvetkov AS (2023). The Tardigrade damage suppressor protein Dsup promotes DNA damage in
                                               neurons. Mol. Cell. Neurosci 125, 103826. 10.1016/j.mcn.2023.103826. [PubMed: 36858083]
                                           63. Yoshida Y, Horikawa DD, Sakashita T, Yokota Y, Kobayashi Y, Tomita M, and Arakawa K
                                               (2021). RNA sequencing data for gamma radiation response in the extremotolerant tardigrade
                                               Ramazzottius varieornatus. Data Br. 36, 107111. 10.1016/j.dib.2021.107111.
                                           64. Goldstein B (2022). Tardigrades and their emergence as model organisms. Curr. Top. Dev. Biol
                                               147, 173–198. [PubMed: 35337449]
                                           65. Perez-Riverol Y, Csordas A, Bai J, Bernal-Llinares M, Hewapathirana S, Kundu DJ, Inuganti
                                               A, Griss J, Mayer G, Eisenacher M, et al. (2019). The PRIDE database and related tools and
                                               resources in 2019: Improving support for quantification data. Nucleic Acids Res. 47, D442–D450.
                                               10.1093/nar/gky1106. [PubMed: 30395289]
                                           66. McNuff R (2018). Laboratory Culture of Hypsibius exemplaris. Cold Spring Harb. Protoc, 867–
                                               870. 10.1101/pdb.prot102319.




Author Manuscript
                                           67. Gabriel WN, McNuff R, Patel SK, Gregory TR, Jeck WR, Jones CD, and Goldstein B (2007). The
                                               tardigrade Hypsibius dujardini, a new model for studying the evolution of development. Dev. Biol
                                               312, 545–559. 10.1016/j.ydbio.2007.09.055. [PubMed: 17996863]
                                           68. Denton D, and Kumar S (2015). Terminal Deoxynucleotidyl Transferase (TdT)-Mediated dUTP
                                               Nick-End Labeling (TUNEL) for Detection of Apoptotic Cells in Drosophila. Cold Spring Harb.
                                               Protoc, 568–572. 10.1101/pdb.prot086199. [PubMed: 26034307]
                                           69. Schindelin J, Arganda-Carreras I, Frise E, Kaynig V, Longair M, Pietzsch T, Preibisch S, Rueden
                                               C, Saalfeld S, Schmid B, et al. (2012). Fiji: an open-source platform for biological-image analysis.
                                               Nat. Methods 9, 676–682. 10.1038/NMETH.2019. [PubMed: 22743772]
                                           70. Carpenter AE, Jones TR, Lamprecht MR, Clarke C, Kang IH, Friman O, Guertin DA, Chang
                                               JH, Lindquist RA, Moffat J, et al. (2006). CellProfiler: image analysis software for identifying
                                               and quantifying cell phenotypes. Genome Biol. 7, R100. 10.1186/gb-2006-7-10-r100. [PubMed:
                                               17076895]
                                           71. Liao Y, Smyth GK, and Shi W (2013). The Subread aligner: Fast, accurate and scalable




Author Manuscript
                                               read mapping by seed-and-vote. Nucleic Acids Res. 41, e108. 10.1093/nar/gkt214. [PubMed:
                                               23558742]
                                           72. Robinson MD, McCarthy DJ, and Smyth GK (2010). edgeR: a Bioconductor package for
                                               differential expression analysis of digital gene expression data. Bioinformatics 26, 139–140.
                                               10.1093/bioinformatics/btp616. [PubMed: 19910308]
                                           73. Bryant DM, Johnson K, Ditommaso T, Tickle T, Couger MB, Payzin-Dogru D, Lee TJ, Leigh
                                               ND, Kuo T-H, Davis GG, et al. (2017). A tissue-mapped Axolotl de novo transcriptome enables
                                               identification of limb regeneration factors. Cell Rep. 18, 762–776. [PubMed: 28099853]




                                                  Curr Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 May 06.
                    Clark-Hachtel et al.                                                                                               Page 21


                                           74. Silva JC, Gorenstein MV, Li GZ, Vissers JPC, and Geromanos SJ (2006). Absolute quantification
                                               of proteins by LCMSE: A virtue of parallel MS acquisition. Mol. Cell. Proteomics 5, 144–156.




Author Manuscript
                                               10.1074/mcp.M500230-MCP200. [PubMed: 16219938]
                                           75. Smith FW, and Goldstein B (2017). Segmentation in Tardigrada and diversification of segmental
                                               patterns in Panarthropoda. Arthropod Struct. Dev 46, 328–340. 10.1016/j.asd.2016.10.005.
                                               [PubMed: 27725256]
                                           76. Smith FW (2018). Embryonic in situ Hybridization for the Tardigrade Hypsibius exemplaris. Cold
                                               Spring Harb. Protoc, 891–899. 10.1101/pdb.prot102350.
                                           77. Heikes KL, Game M, Smith FW, and Goldstein B (2023). The embryonic origin of primordial
                                               germ cells in the tardigrade Hypsibius exemplaris. Dev. Biol 497, 42–58. [PubMed: 36893882]
                                           78. Duvaud S, Gabella C, Lisacek F, Stockinger H, Ioannidis V, and Durinx C (2021). Expasy, the
                                               Swiss Bioinformatics Resource Portal, as designed by its users. Nucleic Acids Res. 49, W216–
                                               W227. 10.1093/nar/gkab225. [PubMed: 33849055]
                                           79. Tenlen JR (2018). Microinjection of dsRNA in Tardigrades. Cold Spring Harb. Protoc, 900–904.
                                               10.1101/pdb.prot102368.
                                           80. R Core Team (2021). R: A language and environment for statistical computing. R Foundation for




Author Manuscript
                                               Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria. https://www.r-project.org/.
                                           81. Benjamini Y, and Hochberg Y (1995). Controlling the False Discovery Rate: A Practical
                                               and Powerful Approach to Multiple Testing. J. R. Stat. Soc. Ser. B 57, 289–300. 10.1111/
                                               j.2517-6161.1995.tb02031.x.
                                           82. Hibshman JD, and Goldstein B (2021). LEA motifs promote desiccation tolerance in vivo. BMC
                                               Biol. 19, 263. 10.1186/s12915-021-01176-0. [PubMed: 34903234]




Author Manuscript




Author Manuscript




                                                  Curr Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 May 06.
                    Clark-Hachtel et al.                                                                                       Page 22



                                                                                    Highlights




Author Manuscript
                                           •        H. exemplaris incurs DNA damage from ionizing radiation, and they repair
                                                    the damage

                                           •        Irradiation causes H. exemplaris to dramatically upregulate certain DNA
                                                    repair genes

                                           •        Expressing some tardigrade DNA repair genes in bacteria can protect against
                                                    radiation

                                           •        At least one upregulated gene contributes to H. exemplaris radiation tolerance




Author Manuscript




Author Manuscript




Author Manuscript




                                               Curr Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 May 06.
                    Clark-Hachtel et al.                                                                                            Page 23




Author Manuscript




Author Manuscript




Author Manuscript




                                           Figure 1. Visualizing DNA damage in tardigrades following ionizing radiation exposure.
                                           (A-C) Representative images of TUNEL signal in individuals that were not exposed to IR
                                           (A), exposed to 4,360 Gy IR (B), and exposed to 4,360 Gy IR and allowed to recover for 24




Author Manuscript
                                           hours (C). The TUNEL signal shown here generally covers entire nuclei and is not obviously
                                           localized to subnuclear structures. Animals were physically disrupted for TUNEL protocol
                                           so above images are fragments of whole adults. Orientation and region of animal in image
                                           are as follows: (A) dorsal up, includes head and first and second leg-bearing segments, (B)
                                           ventral up, includes second and third leg-bearing segments, (C) ventral up, includes head
                                           and first and second leg-bearing segments. Anterior is to the left. Scale bar applies to all
                                           images. (D and E) Plots displaying the relative mean intensity of TUNEL signal per nucleus
                                           for 2,180 Gy (D) and 4,360 Gy (E) IR exposure. For each plot the groups from left to right


                                                  Curr Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 May 06.
                    Clark-Hachtel et al.                                                                                            Page 24


                                           are as follows: not exposed to IR, exposed to IR, not exposed to IR and left for 24 hours,




Author Manuscript
                                           exposed to IR and allowed to recover for 24 hours, (n=11 individuals for all groups, except
                                           2,180 Gy not irradiated 24 hr (n=10) and 2,180 Gy irradiated 24 hr (n=9)). A one-way
                                           ANOVA followed by a post-hoc Dunnett test to the mean of the irradiated timepoint 0 for
                                           each experiment was used to determine significant differences between treatment groups.
                                           Significance is as follows: *p<.05 ** p<.01. 2,180 Gy 0 hr vs. not irradiated 0 hr: p=.02, vs.
                                           not irradiated 24 hr: p=.002, and vs irradiated 24 hr: p=.04. 4,360 Gy 0 hr vs not irradiated 0
                                           hr: p=.04, vs not irradiated 24 hr: p=.008, and vs irradiated 24 hr: p=.07. See also Data S1A.




Author Manuscript




Author Manuscript




Author Manuscript




                                                  Curr Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 May 06.
                    Clark-Hachtel et al.                                                                                             Page 25




Author Manuscript




Author Manuscript




Author Manuscript




                                           Figure 2. H. exemplaris increases expression of certain DNA repair transcripts and proteins in
                                           response to ionizing radiation.
                                           (A) Volcano plot of Log2FC by −Log10(FDR) showing the transcriptional response of H.
                                           exemplaris to 500 Gy IR. The top 15 most significantly enriched transcripts (by FDR)




Author Manuscript
                                           are marked in gray. DNA repair pathway genes among the top 15 are labeled. (B-D)
                                           MA plots displaying Log2FC of H. exemplaris transcripts in response to 500 Gy IR with
                                           (B) transcripts encoding BER proteins marked in orange, (C) transcripts encoding NHEJ
                                           proteins marked in light blue, and (D) transcripts encoding NER, MMR, HR, and TMEJ
                                           proteins marked in yellow, pink, green, and dark blue, respectively. Transcripts encoding
                                           DNA repair proteins that are significantly enriched are indicated by name. Note that LIG1
                                           functions in two pathways. (E) Plot showing Log2FC for selected enriched DNA repair


                                                  Curr Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 May 06.
                    Clark-Hachtel et al.                                                                                        Page 26


                                           transcripts at 100, 500, and 2180 Gy doses of IR. Colors are the same as in MA plots. LIG1




Author Manuscript
                                           is colored as BER (orange), but also functions in TMEJ (dark blue). (F) Relative protein
                                           abundance for DNA repair proteins 6 and 18 hours after exposure to 500 Gy IR. See also
                                           Table S1–S4, Figure S6, and Data S1B.




Author Manuscript




Author Manuscript




Author Manuscript




                                                 Curr Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 May 06.
                    Clark-Hachtel et al.                                                                                             Page 27




Author Manuscript




Author Manuscript
                                           Figure 3: H. exemplaris transcriptomic responses to desiccation and ionizing radiation do not
                                           correlate, but transcriptomic responses to ionizing radiation and bleomycin do.
                                           (A-C) Plots showing the Log2FC of transcripts during desiccation (A) in dried tardigrades
                                           (B) and after a 24 hour treatment with 1 mg/mL bleomycin (C) plotted against the Log2FC
                                           of transcripts in response to 500 Gy IR. Original data for the transcriptional response to
                                           desiccation are from30,31 (A) and32 (B). Pearson correlation test, r2 for the trendlines is
                                           0.003468, 0.003224, and 0.2103, respectively. Colors are the same as in Figure 2. LIG1 is
                                           colored as BER (orange), but also functions in TMEJ (dark blue). See also Figure S1 and S6,
                                           Table S1–S4, and Data S1C.




Author Manuscript




Author Manuscript




                                                  Curr Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 May 06.
                    Clark-Hachtel et al.                                                                                               Page 28




Author Manuscript




Author Manuscript




Author Manuscript




                                           Figure 4. Tissue-specific enrichment of DNA repair transcripts in H. exemplaris following
                                           ionizing radiation exposure.
                                           (A-D) Representative images of in situ hybridization for DNA repair transcripts with and
                                           without exposure to 100 Gy ionizing radiation. Exposure and contrast were adjusted to




Author Manuscript
                                           visualize regions of most intense signal. Expression in stylet glands (arrows), claw glands
                                           (arrowheads), and hindgut (dashed outlines) is indicated where seen. Transcripts encoding
                                           members of the (A) TMEJ, (A-B) BER, (C) NHEJ, and (D) HR pathways are represented.
                                           Scale bar in A applies to all images. Anterior is to the left. Orientation of each image is
                                           as follows: (A) ventral up (B-C) dorsal up. (E) Schematic of a lateral view of an adult
                                           tardigrade with stylet glands (burgundy), claw glands (green), hindgut (orange), and other




                                                  Curr Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 May 06.
                    Clark-Hachtel et al.                                                                                        Page 29


                                           landmark structures (gray) indicated (adapted from64). Some anatomical features are not




Author Manuscript
                                           shown in this diagram. See also Figure S2–S4.




Author Manuscript




Author Manuscript




Author Manuscript




                                                 Curr Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 May 06.
                    Clark-Hachtel et al.                                                                                               Page 30




Author Manuscript




Author Manuscript




Author Manuscript




                                           Figure 5. High levels of certain DNA repair genes are sufficient to improve bacterial survival
                                           after ionizing radiation exposure.
                                           (A) Plot of tardigrade DNA repair transcripts organized from most efficient (left) to least
                                           efficient (right) at improving bacterial IR survival, including controls (GFP and empty). N=6




Author Manuscript
                                           for all transcripts except for Rv Dsup (N=31), PARP2 (N=3), MPG (N=4), GFP (N=31),
                                           empty (N=31), XRCC6 (N=3), XRCC5 (N=3), and LIG4 (N=3). Significance is only
                                           indicated for those transcripts that show significantly improved survival relative to bacteria
                                           carrying the GFP expressing vector or empty vector. (B) Expression of R. cf. varieornatus
                                           Dsup but not H. exemplaris Dsup in bacteria improved bacterial survival after exposure to
                                           ionizing radiation compared to controls (GFP and empty). N=6 for all transcripts. See also
                                           Figure S5 and Data S1D.


                                                  Curr Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 May 06.
                    Clark-Hachtel et al.                                                                                              Page 31




Author Manuscript




Author Manuscript                          Figure 6. High levels of XRCC5 are important for tardigrade ionizing radiation survival.
                                           Survival curves tracking the percent survival of animals following RNAi through 7 days
                                           after exposure to 2,180 Gy IR. Groups are as follows: GFP RNAi Control (light green,
                                           n=45), XRCC5 RNAi Control (light blue, n=47), GFP RNAi irradiated (dark green, n=55),
                                           and XRCC5 RNAi irradiated (dark blue, n=49). **** = p<.0001 (log-rank test). See also
                                           Data S1E.




Author Manuscript




Author Manuscript




                                                  Curr Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 May 06.
                    Clark-Hachtel et al.                                                                                                              Page 32




                    KEY RESOURCES TABLE




Author Manuscript
                     REAGENT or RESOURCE                                  SOURCE                         IDENTIFIER
                     Bacterial and Virus Strains

                     Gateway™ pDEST™17 Vector                             ThermoFisher Scientific        Cat#11803012

                     One Shot™ BL21-AI™ Chemically Competent E.           ThermoFisher Scientific        Cat#C607003
                     coli
                     Chemicals, Peptides, and Recombinant Proteins

                     Bleomycin sulphate powder                            Sigma                          Cat#BP971

                     HEPES                                                Sigma-Aldrich                  Cat#H4034; CAS: 7365-45-9

                     DL-Dithiothreitol                                    Sigma-Aldrich                  Cat#D0632; CAS: 3483-12-3

                     Iodoacetamide                                        Sigma-Aldrich                  Cat#I1149; CAS: 144-48-9

                     Ammonium formate                                     Honeywell Fluka                Cat#17843; CAS: 540-69-2

                     Ammonium acetate                                     Sigma-Aldrich                  Cat#A1542; CAS: 631-61-8




Author Manuscript
                     Trypsin Gold, Mass Spectrometry Grade                Promega                        Cat#V5280

                     Formic acid, Optima™ LC-MS Grade                     Fisher Scientific              Cat#A117-50; CAS:64-18-6

                     Critical Commercial Assays

                     TMR red in situ cell death detection kit             Roche                          Cat#12156792910

                     PicoPure RNA isolation kit                           ThermoFisher                   Cat#KIT0204

                     KAPA mRNA stranded library prep kit                  KAPA Biosystems                Cat#KK8400

                     CB-X protein assay                                   G-Biosciences                  Cat#786-12X

                     Deposited Data

                     Raw and analyzed mRNA sequencing data from           This paper                     GEO: GSE253471
                     ionizing radiation and bleomycin treatment in
                     Hypsibius exemplaris
                     Raw and analyzed MS proteomics data                  This paper                     Pride: PXD047724




Author Manuscript
                     Hypsibius exemplaris genome assembly v3.1.5 and      GenBank                        https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/datasets/genome/
                     associated annotation file                                                          GCA_002082055.1/

                     RNA sequencing data from Hypsibius exemplaris        Boothby et al.30 Hibshman,     https://trace.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Traces/?
                     during drying                                        Cara, and Goldstein31          view=study&acc=SRP098563
                                                                                                         Files Used: SRX2663153, SRX2663154,
                                                                                                         SRX2527798, SRX2661843, SRX2661844,
                                                                                                         SRX2527616

                     RNA sequencing data from dry Hypsibius               Yoshida et al.32               https://trace.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Traces/?
                     exemplaris                                                                          view=study&acc=SRP098585
                                                                                                         Files Used: GSM2472501 - GSM2472506

                     Experimental Models: Organisms/Strains

                     Hypsibius exemplaris:Z151                            Carolina Biological Supply     Cat#133960

                     Oligonucleotides

                     Primers for in situ hybridization probe templates,   This paper                     N/A
                     see Table S5




Author Manuscript
                     Primers for dsRNA templates, see Table S5            This paper                     N/A
                     Software and Algorithms

                     FIJI                                                 Schindelin et al.69            https://imagei.net/software/fiii/downloads

                     CellProfiler                                         Carpenter et al.70             https://cellprofiler.org/releases




                                                     Curr Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 May 06.
                    Clark-Hachtel et al.                                                                                                               Page 33




                     REAGENT or RESOURCE                                 SOURCE                         IDENTIFIER
                     BBmap and BBduk ver 39.01                           BBtools                        https://sourceforge.net/proiects/bbmap/




Author Manuscript
                     featureCounts ver 2.0.6                             Liao, Smyth, and Shi71         https://subread.sourceforge.net/

                     edgeR                                               Robinson, McCarthy, and        https://bioconductor.org/packages/release/bioc/html/
                                                                         Smyth72                        edgeR.html

                     Trinotate ver 4.0.2                                 Bryant et al73                 https://github.com/Trinotate/Trinotate

                     Progenesis QI for Proteomics v. 4.2                 Linear Dynamics                https://www.nonlinear.com/progenesis/qi-for-
                                                                                                        proteomics/

                     Mascot v. 2.5.1                                     Matrix Science                 https://www.matrixscience.com/

                     QuantifyR                                           This paper                     https://github.com/hickslab/QuantifyR
                     Prism 9                                             GraphPad Software              www.graphpad.com

                     R studio ver 2023.06.1+524                          R Core Team80                  https://cran.r-project.org/

                     Other

                     Prominence UFLC                                     Shimadzu                       https://www.shimadzu.com/




Author Manuscript
                     Orbitrap Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer          ThermoFisher Scientific        https://www.thermofisher.com/us/en/home.html

                     nanoAcquity UPLC                                    Waters                         https://www.waters.com/nextgen/us/en.html

                     E220 Focused ultrasonicator                         Covaris                        https://www.covaris.com/

                     ZipTip with 0.6 μL resin                            Millipore Sigma                Cat#ZTC18S096

                     XBridge™ Peptide BEH C18 column                     Waters                         Cat#186009073

                     Acquity Symmetry C18 Trap Column                    Waters                         Cat#186007496

                     Acquity HSS T3 C18 column                           Waters                         Cat#186007474




Author Manuscript




Author Manuscript

                                                    Curr Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 May 06.
