Annals of Case Reports
Brahme A. Ann Case Rep: 9: 101625
www.doi.org/10.29011/2574-7754.101625
www.gavinpublishers.com


Research Article

    New Radiation Oncology Optimization Principles
     Based On In-Vivo Predictive Assay and Recent
     Developments in Molecular Radiation Biology
Anders Brahme*
Department of Oncology-Pathology, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.

    *
     Corresponding author: Anders Brahme, Department of Oncology-Pathology, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden. Email:
    andersbrah@gmail.com
    Citation: Brahme A (2024) New Radiation Oncology Optimization Principles Based On In-Vivo Predictive Assay and Recent
    Developments in Molecular Radiation Biology. Ann Case Report 09: 1625. DOI: 10.29011/2574-7754.101625
    Received Date: 01 February 2024; Accepted Date: 05 February 2024; Published Date: 07 February 2024


        Abstract
        The recent understanding that most TP53-intact normal tissues are Low-Dose Hypersensitive (LDHS) and Low-Dose Apoptotic
        (LDA) implies that the well-known fractionation window at ≈ 2 Gy/Fr defines the optimal tolerance level for most organs at
        risk and not at all the tumor dose as still is customary today when using IMRT. This necessitates new approaches to biologically
        optimized radiation therapy, requiring that the maximum dose to organs at risk should be ≤2.3 Gy/Fr, and especially that it should
        be of low ionization density and LET. Today we know that the fractionation window is due to a low-dose initiation of full DNA
        repair capability in normal tissues first after ≈½ Gy, and we should use this acquired repair advantage to its full extent up to
        ≈2.3 Gy where the High Dose Apoptosis (HDA) may set in. Thus biologically optimized treatments should be focused on the
        application of a low number of high tumor-dose intensity- and/or radiation quality-modulated photon, electron or lower LET light
        ion beams. Doing so, reduces the integral dose delivery and the risk for secondary cancers and generates a real tumor cure without
        risk for caspase-3-induced accelerated tumor cell repopulation. The light ions should truly have the lowest possible LET in normal
        tissues to retain the fractionation window property but still have a high LET only in the gross tumor region to simultaneously
        maximize tumor cell inactivation. This necessitates the use of the lightest ions, from helium to ≈boron, as this fractionation
        advantage is practically lost for carbon and heavier ions. This unique property of the lightest ions is combined with the highest
        possible apoptosis and senescence in front of the Bragg peak and can best be characterized as allowing molecular radiation
        therapy since surrounding normal tissues are only exposed to a low dose and LET that causes easily repairable damage. Many
        other new associated ideas are also discussed, such as optimal use of IMRT, molecular tumor imaging with MRSI, PET-CT and
        phase contrast X-rays, TP53 cell survival radiation biology, biologically optimized radiation therapy: BIOART, quantum biology
        of curative radiation therapy, 4D-space-time radiation therapy optimization, influence of microdosimetric heterogeneity on the
        dose response relation, optimal time dose fractionation, accounting for tumor hypoxia, biologically optimal radiation quality,
        secondary cancer risks, mutant TP53 reactivation, and optimal dose delivery techniques since they are all involved directly or
        indirectly in these new principles for true optimization of radiation therapy.


Keywords: Optimal Dose Per Fractionation; Optimal Time                  with living normal tissues and tumors is one of the most complex
Dose Fractionation; Microdosimetry of Dose Response; TP53 Cell          biomedical problems since it requires detailed knowledge about the
Survival Biology; TP53 Reactivation; Optimal Radiation Quality;         atomic and nuclear physics of the therapeutic beams as well as the
Therapy Optimization; Normal Tissue Tolerance, Radiation-               complex interaction of their generated secondary electrons, and the
Resistant Tumor Phenotype; Secondary Cancer Risk                        molecular biology of living tissues and cells including their complex
                                                                        damage repair systems [1-3]. Detailed knowledge about radiation-
Introduction                                                            induced cellular damage and repair is the key to optimal safety in the
                                                                        therapeutic and diagnostic use and understanding of optimal high-
        The interaction of beams of different ionizing radiation

1                                                                                                                            Volume 09; Issue 01
Ann Case Rep, an open access journal
ISSN: 2574-7754
Citation: Brahme A (2024) New Radiation Oncology Optimization Principles Based On In-Vivo Predictive Assay and Recent Develop-
ments in Molecular Radiation Biology. Ann Case Report 09: 1625. DOI: 10.29011/2574-7754.101625



quality radiation beams. Biologically optimized intensity-modulated photons, electrons, and light ions represent the ultimate development
of radiation therapy today approaching the border of molecular radiation therapy, as illustrated in Figures 1 and 4 [4]. Interestingly, the
imparted absorbed dose and biological effect distributions to normal tissues can be designed so they are as low as possible from a radiation
physical point of view; at the same time, as their therapeutic effect on radiation-resistant tumor cells is as high as possible from a radiation
biological point of view [4-6]. With the lightest ions above protons: He-B, the border region between the clinical gross tumor and the
associated internal target volume due to tumor and tissue motions in relation to surrounding healthy normal tissues can be set as narrow
as physically possible. In addition, the optimal number of treatment fractions can be substantially reduced, and the curative gain factor
on radiation-resistant hypoxic tumor cells may generally be more than doubled compared to low ionization density photons, electrons,
and protons. Figure 1 shows how the optimal selection of therapeutic beams can be arranged and the intensity and energy modulation is
shaped to maximize the complication-free cure probability for the patient with minimal risk for side effects in normal tissues [2, 5, 6].




Figure 1: The fantastic power available by employing biologically optimized inversely planned radiation therapy where the intensity
of each pencil beam can be directed and modulated to maximize the complication free cure [4, 6]. If the approximate sensitivity of the
tumor can be determined from its response the first week of therapy and the normal tissue responses are generally quite well know
from historical data (!; cf. Figures 10- 12, 23, [4, 5]), it is possible to derive the biologically optimal beam directions and their intensity
modulation by dynamic multi leaf collimation or scanning pencil beams (? ; [5]). It is even possible to find the optimal combination
of low and high ionization density radiation (cf. Figures 9, 14, 27 below) and their incident energy spectra as well as the ideal time
dose fractionation pattern, Figure 20 [1-3], using the biologically optimized complication free cure (P+) or more complex optimization
strategies (P++: P+ with concomitant constrained injury minimization [4, 5]). In addition, if we have information about the interaction of
the radiation modalities of interest with other chemotherapeutic agents and compounds of preference, the combined treatment schedule
can also be optimized in biological terms. During the last week of conventional curative treatment, only a hand full of tumor clonogens
remains in the target volume, as indicated in the figure, and they should then preferably be treated with the most microscopically uniform
and homogeneous electron or photon beams (cf. Figures 13 and 18). This is optimal since both the particle beams and the tumor cells
are quantized, and thus, some tumor clonogens may be protected from lethal hits by the inevitable cold spots between the ions during
the last few and normally most curative therapeutic dose fractions, Figures 13, 15, 18 [1-5]! This will be the optimal approach since
the most severe hypoxia is generally gone, especially after a last weekend of effective homologous recombination repair and tumor
cell reoxygenation such that an excessively elevated ionization density and LET (linear energy transfer) may no longer be necessary
(cf Figure 21, [2]). Furthermore, the steepest possible dose response is achieved, and thus, the possibility of truly maximizing the
complication-free cure as clearly demonstrated in Figures 18a, b and 25.

2                                                                                                                              Volume 09; Issue 01
Ann Case Rep, an open access journal
ISSN: 2574-7754
Citation: Brahme A (2024) New Radiation Oncology Optimization Principles Based On In-Vivo Predictive Assay and Recent Develop-
ments in Molecular Radiation Biology. Ann Case Report 09: 1625. DOI: 10.29011/2574-7754.101625



       Interestingly, the present review brings in several new findings and understandings that strongly influence these processes in
many important classical areas of interest that urgently need reconsideration. Based on directly observed clinical tumor reactions for
the individual patient (In Vivo predictive assay) and historically established dose response parameters of most normal tissues (γ, D50,
σ50, s, [6]) advanced biological therapy optimization is possible (Figure 1). Depending on the charge and mass of the particle beams,
their fluence and ranges are exponentially absorbed for uncharged neutrons and photons, whereas electrons and light multiply charged
ions have charge- dependent stopping powers due to electromagnetic interactions, and come to rest within a finite range in body tissues.
Interestingly, in addition all ions similar to neutrons also have exponential attenuation due to their nuclear collisions, which severely
reduces their fluence at a depth, especially for heavier ions beyond carbon (cf Figure 27 and [7]: Figure 8). This greatly influences
their clinical usefulness for radiation therapy, as discussed in further detail in Figures 2 and 29 below. For example, the first study of
Neon ions was less advantageous than initially expected due to their high nuclear attenuation. This resulted in high stopping power and
fragmentation tails also in normal tissues, even though the high LET was a clear improvement for hypoxic tumors. The clinical situation
was somewhat reminiscent of the problems facing neutron therapy ([7, 8], see Figures 14, 16, 29). In particular, the microdosimetric
quantities in Figure 14 of different radiation therapy beams show that both carbon and particularly neon ion SOBP have too high
biological effect in normal tissues both in the entrance, plateau region and behind the tumor in the fragmentation tail to be far from
optimally suitable for radiation therapy. The same is surely true for oxygen ions located midway between C and Ne, and they have for
some reason received high but unfortunately poorly motivated interest in recent years.




Figure 2: Illustration of the differences and similarities between biological optimization with neutral (photons and neutrons) and charged
(electron and light ion) particle beams. Biologically optimized radiation therapy using the in vivo predictive-assay based BIOART
approach is explained further in Figures 10-12. The light ions have advantages both with regard to attenuation, low multiple scattering
penumbras and sharp practical ranges (cf [7]: Figures 7-10). Photon and neutron beams can mainly handle longitudinal protection by
intensity modulation, whereas electrons and, in particular, light ions have finite practical ranges and the sharpest possible penumbras.
To keep the energy deposition as low as possible in normal tissues, it is essential that the LET and attenuation be as low as possible in
the entrance and plateau region of the beam dominated by “low dose radiation hypersensitive normal tissues”. This calls for the lightest
ions, as also seen in Figures 27 and 29 below [2, 7]. Unfortunately, these facts have largely been neglected in modern carbon ion therapy
losing the advantageous classic clinical fractionation window advantage (cf Figures 4, 6, 19, 20 [2, 3]).


3                                                                                                                         Volume 09; Issue 01
Ann Case Rep, an open access journal
ISSN: 2574-7754
Citation: Brahme A (2024) New Radiation Oncology Optimization Principles Based On In-Vivo Predictive Assay and Recent Develop-
ments in Molecular Radiation Biology. Ann Case Report 09: 1625. DOI: 10.29011/2574-7754.101625


High Resolution Molecular Tumor Imaging
Modern radiation therapy have reached sub mm precision in 3D absorbed dose delivery, and consequently, we also need this degree of
accuracy in our diagnostic imaging techniques for true tumor localization. CT and MR have already reached this geometrical accuracy
but not when we also require highly specific molecular tumor imaging. With MR, tumor-specific metabolite imaging still has a resolution
of 10 to 15 mm, which could be reduced to the submm level by high field strength MRSI units (magnetic resonance spectroscopic
imaging, Figure 3a, [4]). Dual energy CT may allow more tumor specific imaging, especially using molecular contrast agents but the
ultimate development of 3D high resolution X-ray imaging probably may require the use of stereoscopic phase contrast flash X-rays.
A potential sub mm to 10 μm, 1 msec resolution in live humans is then theoretically possible [4]: Figures 12 and 13. PET and PET-CT
have reached ≈3-4 mm tumor-specific resolution in whole body imaging, and ultrasensitive PET units with a very large field of view
may improve this significantly down to ≈1 mm with imaging times of a few minutes. This would even make positron diffusion unfolding
feasible to further improve the geometric resolution (Figure 3b, [4]).
High Resolution Tumor Metabolite Imaging using 15 - 20 T Whole Body MRSI
With standard 3 Tesla MR units, the geometric resolution with tumor metabolite spectroscopic imaging is only ≈10 mm to 15 mm. This
makes the diagnostic imaging of true tumor tissue substantially impaired, requiring larger setup margins and a significant increase in the
irradiation of normal tissues will be necessary. At ≈15 Tesla, the geometric resolution with tumor metabolite imaging may reach ≈1 mm
with substantial improvement in molecular spectral imaging for accurate radiation therapy planning. The highest field strength whole
body MR unit at present is the 12 Tesla INUMAC system (cf. Figure 3a [9, 10]), developed in collaboration between French and German
scientists mainly for brain studies with ≈1 mm resolution (http://phys.org/news/2013-10-world-powerful-mri-online.html [10] and a 14
Tesla system is being developed in China [11]). It should be possible to reduce the aperture somewhat from the present 900 mm of the
INUMAC unit and use the latest type of high field strength tolerating windings to get into the 15 to 20 Tesla region with sub mm spectral
resolution (cf lower middle insert in Figure 3a and [11]). To further improve the spectral resolution and reconstruction speed, the scanner
should use the Fast Padè transform rather than the Fourier transform [4, 12]. This technique may further increase the effective magnetic
field of the unit, which may be highly desirable for spectroscopic imaging. In Figure 3a, spectral metabolite imaging of a low-resolution
prostate and high-resolution brain scanner shows a substantial improvement in the image resolution of a small-bore camera and the
value of using alternative metabolites for accurate target volume definition and tumor confirmation [9]. Many further details on the new
potential units have been discussed recently [13, 14].




Figure 3a: MR spectroscopic imaging with different metabolites of a prostate and brain tumor (modified from [9, 10]). It is clearly seen
that both choline and lactate give rather similar indications of gross tumor extension, and choline works well for the prostate to the left.
High Resolution Ultra-Sensitive Whole-Body Molecular PET Imaging
      A third revolution in tumor imaging after CT and MR have been introduced by PET and PET-CT. Their unique ability to allow
highly specific molecular imaging with positron emitting tracers has really improved tumor diagnostics. Unfortunately, the geometric
resolution is only 3-4 mm in whole body cameras, whereas brain- and other small volume cameras may reach 1 mm and below already
today. To obtain this kind of resolution, which is needed for accurate radiation therapy, it is desirable to decrease the crystal size and
increase the sensitivity primarily by increasing the axial field of view from 15 cm to 25 cm to ≈120 cm. This will increase the sensitivity
≈ 50-fold and reduce the imaging time to a few minutes without needing to scan the patient or the camera to see the full extent of
the disease (Figure 3b, [4]: Figure 7). Therefore, even if the cost increases by a factor of approximately four, it will be possible to
substantially increase the patient throughput with the very short imaging times. Furthermore, it may become feasible to unfold random
positron diffusion to improve resolution owing to the much higher number of registered local annihilation events. In addition, it will be
important to correct for respiration dynamics, so one idea is to combine PET imaging in list mode with full 3D laser or projection camera
optical imaging [17] so that each phase of the breathing cycle is fully synchronized with the PET data set. It may then even be possible
to project all the PET data to one fixed position of the breathing cycle, for example, when simultaneous 4D CT data and projection


4                                                                                                                          Volume 09; Issue 01
Ann Case Rep, an open access journal
ISSN: 2574-7754
Citation: Brahme A (2024) New Radiation Oncology Optimization Principles Based On In-Vivo Predictive Assay and Recent Develop-
ments in Molecular Radiation Biology. Ann Case Report 09: 1625. DOI: 10.29011/2574-7754.101625



camera data are available, not least when the 3 imaging data sets are fully integrated as in Figure 3b. With all these methods at work, a
fast whole body camera may reach a resolution of ≈ 1 mm. The treatment could then be performed with breath hold in the phase where
the complication-free cure of the treatment is maximized or by synchronizing treatment by a similar projection camera in the treatment
room (cf Figure 36a). In fact, it could be most cost efficient if all diagnostic and therapeutic units were provided with projection cameras
for Auto Set Up and full breathing cycle synchronization. This would allow almost perfect synchronization of all data sets whether using
CT, MR or PET (cf Figures 36 a, b) for dose delivery and biological responsiveness imaging (Figures 10-12). With advanced imaging
equipment, it would generally be much less cost efficient if two or more very expensive units were totally integrated. Often, they may
not work simultaneously, and one unit may be prohibited from use when the other is working. Furthermore, we may need more than
two data sets for many situations. What one may save is the setup of the patient at two different units, but with projection camera Auto
Set Up this is a minor problem and there are still motion artifacts between the two diagnostic modalities even if the initial positioning is
correct. The only other solution to all these simultaneousness problems would be ultrafast imaging (such as 3D flash phase contrast [6])
and dose delivery by all methods requiring accurate synchronization of all 4D diagnostic and therapeutic techniques (see Figure 36a, b).
Obviously, some combined units have extra benefits such as PET-CT, but often the patient is changing position on such units between
the two imaging sessions making accurate Auto Set Up even preferred, especially using 4D imaging synchronization procedures.
Interestingly, today, this problem can be solved by fully integrated PET-CT units (Figure 3b [6]) since modern electronics allow the same
detector to be used for CT and PET. Avalanche photo diodes, for example, can be run in a low voltage current mode for CT and then be
driven on a high voltage single photon counting mode for PET. Furthermore, the open PET design [15,16] could be used to put a high
contrast and resolution Phase Contrast CT, or even an ultrafast stereoscopic phase contrast X-ray unit in the middle of the PET camera
where the PET sensitivity would also be maximal (almost doubled [4, 16] see also more recent ideas presented by UCD and LBL [18]).




Figure 3b: Cross section through a dedicated high-resolution open 4D-PET-CT-PC tumor camera where a central opening is introduced
to allow a high resolution in the unique CT region. The PET detectors may also detect peripheral CT photons but at a lower resolution
sufficient for optimal PET reconstruction using CT attenuation data. The design may alternatively include a high-resolution stereoscopic
phase contrast X-ray unit in the open PET configuration ([15, 16, 17] cf also Figure 10). To compensate for internal motions, a projection
camera is also included to allow accurate unfolding of breathing motions based on a similarly registered 4D CT data set. Thanks to the
4D-PET-CT-PC with the Projection Camera, it would also allow projection of all breathing phases on the optimal phase for radiation
therapy with full resolution and sensitivity in the PET image. In the treatment room, a similar camera could reproject the internal target
volume on the skin surface of the patient as seen from the radiation source point of view in real time to show by augmented reality if the
tumor is always covered by the collimator opening, as shown in Figure 36b.




5                                                                                                                          Volume 09; Issue 01
Ann Case Rep, an open access journal
ISSN: 2574-7754
Citation: Brahme A (2024) New Radiation Oncology Optimization Principles Based On In-Vivo Predictive Assay and Recent Develop-
ments in Molecular Radiation Biology. Ann Case Report 09: 1625. DOI: 10.29011/2574-7754.101625


Radiation Biology of TP53 in the Cell Survival of Tumors and Normal Tissues
The recent Repairable-Homologous-Repairable (RHR) damage formulation based on the interaction cross-sections for radiation-
induced cellular inactivation, repair, misrepair and apoptosis in TP53 intact and mutant cell lines can be used to truly optimize radiation
therapy. The newly understood tumor and normal tissue response characteristics requires renewed thinking about many aspects the
biological optimization of radiation therapy. It has already been suggested that most TP53-intact normal tissues are generally Low-
Dose Hypersensitive (LDHS, see lower left insert of Figure 4) and that the inherent microscopic heterogeneity of higher Linear Energy
Transfer (LET) ion treatments the last week of treatment would benefit from a low LET round up, as shown in Figures 15, 18a, b,
and 21 [1-3] below. The ability of the new method to quantify apoptosis [1] has helped identify the early Low-Dose Hypersensitivity
(LDHS) and Low-Dose Apoptosis (LDA) of most normal tissues and tumors with intact TP53 and ATM genes. This mechanism has
probably been developed by nature’s natural proses of preferential survival advantage select to ensure minimal risk for severe mutations
to the genome before the DNA repair system is fully functional after a dose of ½ - 1 Gy [1-3, 19-21]. As a compensating measure, the
apoptosis-inducing caspase 3 gene product (Figure 4 lower right) remarkably “remembers” this protective induced low dose apoptotic
cell loss and starts cellular repopulation to reestablish homeostasis in the tissues after being irradiated. This useful mechanism in
normal tissues, e.g., after accidental injury or irradiation or other damage, is a well-known problem after suboptimal radiation therapy
where it can cause accelerated repopulation of remaining clonogenic tumor cells at the end of a treatment [22]. A clear curative intent
is probably the principal way to avoid this tumor reactivating mechanism to just ensure normal tissue recovery. These studies also
identified that maximum apoptosis is induced by the lowest LET ions largely as they have the highest fluence of δ -electron-induced
apoptosis produced by the primary ions per unit dose [1, 6]. With a too high LET, apoptosis and senescence will instead be high in the
normal tissues in front of and behind the tumor, which definitely is undesirable from a complication-free cure point of view, even if
hypoxic tumors may marginally benefit from a high LET (cf Figures 27 and 29 below, [3, 7]). Modern carbon ion therapists has largely
disregarded this elevated LET in normal tissues just because it is lower than at the Bragg peak but not as low as that of electrons and
X-rays that is providing a significant normal tissue advantageous fractionation window (cf figures 6, 7, 19, 21)!




Figure 4: The guardian of the genome: TP53 largely determine the cellular response to different types of radiation [1-3, 6, 19-21]. Mild
stress phosphorylates the serine 15 and 20 sites on p53 by ATM and CHK2, resulting in cell cycle block and DNA repair. This results in
LDHS in normal tissues but generally not in tumors that often suffers a mutant TP53 gene, as seen in the cell survival insert. Local high
doses and high ionization densities (LET) are resulting in DDSBs (Dual Double Strand Breaks see lower right corner [3, 4, 23, 24]) that
increase the severity of the damage. Thus, phosphorylating the serine 46 site, e.g., via p38K or ATM, and a High-Dose Apoptotic (HDA)
response may get triggered. DDSBs are the most common multiply damaged site and their probabilities are determining the biological
effectiveness of different types of radiation as seen in Figures 9, 27, [24]. Lithium-Boron ions allow a unique therapeutic use by inducing
massive apoptotic-senescent tumor cell response mainly within the Bragg peak (cf Figures 26, 27, σh: homologically repairable damage
and σi: direct inactivation cross-sections [1]: Figure 8, [2]). In front of and beyond the Bragg peak, the LET is low, and nonhomologically
easily repairable damage is mainly induced (σn: “NHEJ” cross-section [1]: Figure 8, [2]). This unique property of the lightest ions can
best be characterized as molecular radiation therapy since the highest possible apoptosis and senescence can mainly be induced in a 5
mm size spot with mainly low dose and especially low LET in the surrounding normal tissues [1, 2, 6].




6                                                                                                                          Volume 09; Issue 01
Ann Case Rep, an open access journal
ISSN: 2574-7754
Citation: Brahme A (2024) New Radiation Oncology Optimization Principles Based On In-Vivo Predictive Assay and Recent Develop-
ments in Molecular Radiation Biology. Ann Case Report 09: 1625. DOI: 10.29011/2574-7754.101625



The increased flexibility of the new RHR formulation which               system of most, if not all, normal tissues, as described in more detail
is describing the shape of the cell inactivation probability has         in Figure 4. This figure illustrates how the TP53 gene works as a
resulted in a significantly augmented description of the low- and        complex cellular mastermind and controller by determining how
high- dose apoptosis- and LET- induced cell kill, especially in          the structure of DNA damage should best be repaired and whether
TP53 normal and mutant tumors with increased survival and often          senescence and apoptosis are needed, [1-3, 30-32]. DNA damage
mutant DNA repair-genes causing a low dose radiation resistant           by ionizing radiation can induce augmented phosphorylation of
phenotype, (LDRR). It is well known that the nonhomologous               three Serine sites (nr 15, 20, 46) cf [11]) on TP53, following the
end-joining (NHEJ, [1-3]) pathway is the dominating DNA repair           increase in the extent of damage through some of its key upstream
process at low LET, and it is very fast. Ku70, Ku80, and a DNApk         proteins, such as ATM, CHK2, and p38K as well as 53BP1 or
dimer bind together the broken DNA ends in a few seconds and             BRCA1,2 to signal whether the currently best repair process
simultaneously recruit p53 [19], such that the multiple DNA strand       is going to be NHEJ or HR. Most experimental tumor cell lines
ends at high-dose and LET local damage can be repaired together          suffer from a mutant TP53 gene, making the early/low dose (0.5-
in the right order except possibly for the δ - electron generated dual   1.5 Gy) radiation response more gradual without low-dose LDA
DSB (DDSB) [24]. This process is essential especially at high LET        and thus no LDHS. Thus making a low dose radiation resistant
levels when the MRN dimer complex often replaces Ku-DNApk                (LDRR) phenotype as shown in the tumor type cell survival insert
heterodimers not least if the cell is in the S or G2 phase of the cell   in Figure 4 (cf also Figures 5-7 and the U1690 SCLC cell survival
cycle, and the homology-searching mechanism of Homologous                in Figure 33). As TP53 intact cells are irradiated, after ¼ Gy, ATM
Recombination (HR) is needed for high-fidelity repair [24, 25].          is autophosphorylated and in turn phosphorylates the serine 15 site
This makes HR more important than NHEJ at very high LETs,                on p53 trying to start NHEJ repair. After a total of ½ Gy or 18
partly as less low- LET-type damage is induced ([1]: Figure 8 with       DSBs, CHK2 is also phosphorylated and phosphorylates the serine
three ions (B, C, and N) and three different cell lines, [26-29]:C),     20 site on p53 to achieve fully efficient DNA repair with both HR
where the last reference [29] is a true molecular confirmation of the    and NHEJ up toward 1 Gy [1- 3, 19-21]. As seen from the lower
predictions of RHR formulation ([1]: Figure 8, [2]). Interestingly,      left insert in Figure 4 and Figures 5 and 6, this last step results in
the new repair formulation allows for the quantification of              a switch in normal tissue sensitivity from an initial LDHS stage
concurrent independent NHEJ and HR repair, as well as the                before the full serine 15 and 20 phosphorylation of p53 generates a
HR repair of NHEJ misrepair, alone or concurrent with other              more radiation-tolerant state. In fact, the well-known experimental
ongoing HR repair processes. These new DNA repair terms (cf.             demonstration that the LDHS property can be eliminated by
lower left corner of Figure 4) make it possible to describe cellular     low-dose preirradiation is a clear indication that the first ½ Gy
repair far beyond the conventional Linear Quadratic model (LQ).          is needed to starts up efficient DNA repair. After that, the cellular
Interestingly, the new DNA repair-based formulation inherently           repair system is fully activated and functional, with reduced cell
describes LDHS and LDA as they are linked to the DNA repair              loss and almost a survival plateau toward 2 Gy [1,2,15, 33- 36].




7                                                                                                                              Volume 09; Issue 01
Ann Case Rep, an open access journal
ISSN: 2574-7754
Citation: Brahme A (2024) New Radiation Oncology Optimization Principles Based On In-Vivo Predictive Assay and Recent Develop-
ments in Molecular Radiation Biology. Ann Case Report 09: 1625. DOI: 10.29011/2574-7754.101625




Figure 5: Demonstration that LDHS is a cell-nuclear phenomenon by avoiding cytoplasmic irradiation, and the LDA response is clearly
strengthened. Cytoplasmic irradiation may react to direct mitochondrial damage, possibly partly through its maternal DNA, and with
less p53, so it is likely a general phenomenon in most cells (Experimental data: [37] cf Figures 4, 6, 7, CDN1 is a Closest Distance Norm
linear fit, not least square! [3]).
       It is clear from Figures 4-6 that doses well above 2 GyE are needed for significant tumor cure, and the dose to normal tissues
should be just above 2 Gy or below to ensure optimal radiation recovery, as clearly shown in Figure 7 with the pale blue dotted tangent
line through the origin indicating the shallowest damage slope per unit dose to normal tissues. The LDA and LDHS of normal tissues
are caused by 5- 15% acute low-dose apoptosis (Figures 4-7 and [1, 20, 21]), but interestingly, most likely, due to the compensating
measure of caspase-3-induced cellular repopulation [24], late effects are therefore few as it try to compensate the apoptotic cell loss.
This will re-establish homeostasis in normal tissues thus minimizes late normal tissue damage and generate a fractionation window,
but it may sometimes also repopulate malignant tumor clonogens if they are not entirely eradicated by the treatment [24]. This means
that LDA and LDHS truly protect normal tissues from potential low-dose mutations before NHEJ and HR are fully functional and can
address the damage. Interestingly, the recent publication on DNA repair quantification using the RHR formulation demonstrated that this
early low-dose cell loss before establishing full repair efficiency is mainly due to an intact TP53 gene in most normal tissues. The cell
loss is due to LDA induction ([1]: Figures 7, 9 a, b and 12 a, c, d), in general agreement with [20, 21] and the present study’s Figure 4,
but may also happen for those tumors that harbor intact TP53 and ATM related genes. This direct LDA and its associated LDHS is most
likely a general property of intact normal tissues and the cells natural way to protect them self from low-dose, potentially cancerous,
mutations before full DNA repair efficiency is established after ≈ ½ Gy [1,20, 36]. The normal therapeutic 2 Gy fractions generate 75
DSBs and possibly also one δ-electron generated dual DSB (DDSB) that may induce High-Dose Apoptosis (HDA) via serine 46, as
shown in Figure 4. In fact, these DDSBs as shown recently [23] are the key effectors of all curative radiation therapies, as described in
great detail and shown in the lower right corner of Figure 4, and explain why normal tissues at risk should never receive more than ≈2.3
Gy of low LET per treatment fraction, as discussed in further detail in Figures 19 and 20 below. Most tumor cell lines and more than
50% of all clinical tumors are characterized by a mutant TP53 gene that commonly eliminates most LDHS and early LDA to obtain a


8                                                                                                                         Volume 09; Issue 01
Ann Case Rep, an open access journal
ISSN: 2574-7754
Citation: Brahme A (2024) New Radiation Oncology Optimization Principles Based On In-Vivo Predictive Assay and Recent Develop-
ments in Molecular Radiation Biology. Ann Case Report 09: 1625. DOI: 10.29011/2574-7754.101625



low-dose radiation- resistant LDRR phenotype and an LQ-tumor-like survival shoulder, as seen from the insert in Figure 4 and Figure
6. As shown for mouse embryo fibroblasts with key repair genes knocked out, both CHK2-/- and particularly ATM-/- cells lose all the
LDHS of wild-type (wt) cells, highlighting the importance of the low-dose phosphorylation steps (Figure 4, [1]: Figure 13, and [19, 38]).
Obviously, there are also some wt TP53 and wt ATM tumor cell lines that may show LDHS properties (cf [35] and Figure 32, [1, 2]).




Figure 6: Close-up of the characteristic cell survival curves of intact LDHS normal tissues and most tumor cell lines that often have a
mutant TP53 gene, resulting in a low-dose radiation resistance (LDRR) phenotype due to a lack of LDA (cf Figure 4 insert). As seen
from the low dose curve shapes, such tumors generally need light ions with low LET in normal tissues or high IMRT doses for effective
cure. On the right side, some of the key clinical conclusions drawn from these curve shapes are summarized (cf [1-3] for further details).
In radiation therapy, this means that the fully functional DNA repair system should continue to be utilized until more severe high-dose
apoptosis sets in after 2- 2.5 GyE, as seen in Figure 4. Thus, there is a low-LET optimal radiation therapy fractionation window in normal
tissues ≈ 1.8- 2.3 Gy/Fr to minimize normal tissue damage, as seen indirectly in Figures 4-7 and further discussed in detail below (cf.
[2]: Figure 5 [3, 39]).
       The most recent RHR paper also investigated LDHS and LDA for light ions, demonstrating that it generally peaks for low-LET
ions (≈20 eV/nm, [2]: Figure 3), where for reasons related to ion interaction physics, the highest low-energy δ-electron production
per unit dose occurs, as the LET is low but sufficient to induce apoptosis, and the ion fluence per unit dose is highest. Thus, apoptosis
peaked here (31% measured at 3 Gy of 40 eV/nm B5+ ions ([1]: Figures 7, 11, 12, 13)), and a clear but small LDHS was observed ([3]:
Figure 16, [40]), mainly due to the early dual NHEJ only and HR misrepair (5% at 0.5 Gy, estimated ([1]: Figures 7, 8 and 9b)). The
31% value was not just LDA but mainly serine-46-induced HDA since at high LET, the LDA and HDA regions almost overlap to make
an almost straight exponential survival curve (HDA sets in after ≈2+ GyE or 0.7 Gy high LET, as shown in Figure 4). Therefore, even
if there is a weak low-LET ion LDHS and LDA, it is most likely not sufficient to establish a real light ion fractionation window with
carbon ions but surely with the entrance plateau and fragmentation tail of low-LET lithium ions (cf lower lain of Figure 4 [1, 6], Figures
6, 7 [2, 3, 34]: with 60Co and Figure 33 with mut p53-reactivated, as well as for lowest-LET boron ions and 60Co in Figure 32). In fact,
as the LET goes above ≈55 eV/nm, the low dose hypersensitivity is almost gone since then 0.6 Gy ≈ 2 GyE, and the δ-ray multiplicity
reaches ≈3, so cells increasingly follow directly the high-dose apoptosis HDA pathway. This results in an almost straight high DDSB and

9                                                                                                                         Volume 09; Issue 01
Ann Case Rep, an open access journal
ISSN: 2574-7754
Citation: Brahme A (2024) New Radiation Oncology Optimization Principles Based On In-Vivo Predictive Assay and Recent Develop-
ments in Molecular Radiation Biology. Ann Case Report 09: 1625. DOI: 10.29011/2574-7754.101625



δ-electron density exponential cell survival curve, as indicated in     often was of low clinical importance at the time but truly not today
Figures 4, 6, and 32 [1, 3, 23]. The high DDSB production should        [16]. From the late 1960s, the still currently dominating linear
therefore always be reserved for target tissues either by high-dose     quadratic model could better describe the slight curvature of the
low LET or preferably Bragg peaks from the lightest ions beyond         quasilinear medium-dose cell survival by its α and β factors of
protons up to boron (cf. Figure 9). Thus, LDA, (cf. [41] for LDA)       most tumors but did not account so well for the low- and high-dose
HDA and DDSB are very valuable therapeutically in the tumor,            survival, at least for most normal tissues, as seen in Figure 7. It
but unfortunately often lost by a mutant TP53 gene. Even more           also misses a true repair term, as a high repair requires a high β, but
important can the often associated senescence be (cf Figure 31,         that means less survival since the term is negative, so α needs to be
[1-3, 42- 44]), as also described in Figure 4, since it does not        reduced to better describe the survival, which may only work in a
cause later problems with caspase-3 activation of tumor clonogens       small-dose region, and α loses its original meaning. This illogical
[22]. Interestingly, these therapeutic processes together are the       effect, and the fact that it gives a poor description of LDHS normal
key functions of molecular radiation therapy, not least by the          tissue survival, has misled two generations of radiation biologists
associated low LET in normal tissues simultaneously retaining the       to trust it rather uncritically even if it describes experimental often
fractionation window capability but also because the lightest ions      TP53 mutant tumor cell lines better than Ln. The beauty of the
simultaneously maximizes tumor apoptosis and senescence [1,             third Repairable- Conditionally Repairable (RCR) model is that it
2, 4, 23, 41]. A very interesting way to increase these therapeutic     is very simple and describes what occurs at large to the cells using
properties on TP53 mutant tumors, which are known to be a major         Poisson statistics with a simple exponential term for missed cells
clinical problem due to LDRR, as seen in Figures 4 and 6, is to         and a linear exponential term for the correctly repaired fraction
use a p53 reactivating compound as described in more detail in          of sublethal hit cells. Thus, it is a logical continuation of the Ln
Figure 33 below. To further elucidate the development of the cell       expression, as seen in Figure 7 and [45]. It therefore can describe
survival curve shape description, some key steps are summarized         the LDHS quite well and solves the repair and overkill problem
in Figures 7 and 8, considering the normal lung epithelial cell data    at low and high doses seen with the LQ model. The repairable-
[1-3, 29] and V79 hamster cells, respectively. From the 1940s to        homologically repairable formulation (RHR) goes a few steps
1960s, the logarithmic Linear Model (Ln-) was established, with         further by accounting for the two major DNA repair pathways,
a back extrapolated (slope D0) initial cell number (n) larger than      as mentioned above, and their associated misrepair processes, as
1 to account for cellular division and repair during irradiation.       seen in the lower right corner of Figure 7. This formulation can
Alternatively, the so-called quasithreshold dose (Dq, which is          therefore handle cell lines with mutant and/or knocked-out repair
actually related to LDHS, as seen in Figure 7) was also used to         genes, high and low LETs, and apoptosis induction [1-3].
indicate that the linear extrapolation seemed to start from a dose
that was wasted due to tumor cell repopulation and repair. Clearly,
this was a rather crude way to describe the early cell survival that




Figure 7: Cell survival curve models have during the last century been developed from the linear exponential model with back
extrapolated effective initial cell number (1), n, Ln) to the currently dominating linear quadratic formula (2), LQ), which does not even
account well for cell repair as Ln does. The more recent repairable- conditionally repairable model (3), RCR [45] handles the cellular
repair of sublethal damage considerably better and separates it clearly from unhit survival. The most recent repairable- homologically
repairable (4), RHR) formulation further accounts separately for nonhomologous and homologous recombination repair, as shown in
the lower right corner, and can estimate the apoptotic and senescent fraction and individual repair processes (cf. [1]: Figures 1- 3 [23]:
Figure 2b). Interestingly, the least damage per unit dose is obtained between 1.8 and 2.3 Gy/Fr, as indicated by the fine dotted pail blue
tangent line with the shallowest slope possible through a point on the survival curve and the point of unit survival [2]. For further details,
see [1-3, 23, 34, 45].




10                                                                                                                            Volume 09; Issue 01
Ann Case Rep, an open access journal
ISSN: 2574-7754
Citation: Brahme A (2024) New Radiation Oncology Optimization Principles Based On In-Vivo Predictive Assay and Recent Develop-
ments in Molecular Radiation Biology. Ann Case Report 09: 1625. DOI: 10.29011/2574-7754.101625




Figure 8: The development of cell survival models characterizing the shape of the cell survival curve from target inactivation type
theories first summarized by Zimmer to the repair models initiated by Pohlits Cybernetic repair model [46] and the DNA repair
formulation separating slow homologous repair from other faster repair types. Elkind’s early cell survival experiment demonstrating
the importance of the fast 24 hrs NHEJ repair, here modified to include also the slow Homologous Recombination repair that play an
important role in the 3-day weekend brake of conventional radiation therapy (cf also the insert of Figure 20). Renewed repair thinking
is essential for understanding normal tissue survival, as shown in Figures 4-6 and especially Figures 7, 20 [1-3, 23, 47]. The very
interesting incomplete repair model of Thames is a kind of bridge between the two groups following Elkind type data (cf insert in
Figure 20, [3]). The underlying cartoon by Wolfgang Pohlit mid 1970s trying to bridge the two different schools, but unfortunately the
difference is much more serious than this humoristic point of view (cf [1-7])!
       It is thus extremely important to consider the significant differences between the cell survival of most tumors and generally
LDHS normal tissues when designing optimal radiation therapy protocols, as shown in Figures 6- 9. It is unfortunate that the bulk of
established tumor cell lines mostly suffer from TP53 and associated mutations, so they can easily grow in the laboratory and it lead to
the erroneous conclusion that all cell lines have LQ-like shoulders, almost making the LQ model a dogmatic model of true cell survival.
In fact, it is most likely that all intact normal tissues have wild-type TP53 and ATM genes and thus are linked to LDHS and LDA, as
recently indicated (Figure 4, [1-3, 21]), and it is probably an inherited growth advantage to avoid cancerous transformations after low-
level genetic damage that may otherwise not be correctly repaired. The intriguing reason why it went undetected for such a long time
is that too few studies were conducted on live normal tissues at low doses and with sufficient accuracy until Joiner [35] found low
dose hypersensitivity in mouse renal cells. Furthermore, LDA-associated accelerated repopulation via caspase-3 is a natural way to
compensate for LDA and LDHS at the end of an irradiation sequence to truly re-establish normal tissue homeostasis [2, 18] and thereby
practically hide all the earlier low-dose cell losses (LDA) in subsequent studies.
      The more conceptual changes in cell survival description during this period are shown in Figure 8 as the initial target based
theories of plain cell kill gradually had to be replaced by the cellular repair models that could better describe the temporal processes
and the influence of the true DNA repair processes. Fortunately, the most commonly used LQ-model may still be useful to describe

11                                                                                                                      Volume 09; Issue 01
Ann Case Rep, an open access journal
ISSN: 2574-7754
Citation: Brahme A (2024) New Radiation Oncology Optimization Principles Based On In-Vivo Predictive Assay and Recent Develop-
ments in Molecular Radiation Biology. Ann Case Report 09: 1625. DOI: 10.29011/2574-7754.101625


the fractionation sensitivity at least of TP53 mutant tumors (cf        the associated higher DDSB production, as seen in the upper left
Eq 2, 3) that are most common clinically and largely miss LDHS          panel of Figure 9. Thus the DDSBs are truly our best tool and
and instead show a clinically problematic LDRR phenotype, but           effector to inactivate a tumor by radiation and we do not need too
it is unsuitable for normal tissues. Today, the LDRR tumors may         many of them as we get from carbon and heavier ions [23]. The
require modern IMRT approaches, light ions and/or adjuvant              euchromatic regions that are more common in tumor tissues are
p53 reactivating compounds (see below). The high biological             characterized by more spares beads on a string chromatin that
effectiveness of ion beams as well as low energy electrons and          reduce the nucleosome density and the number of DDSBs that a
photons are almost totally described by their slowing down spectra      single δ-electron can reach, as seen by the few higher multiplicity
of δ-electrons (0.2-1.5 keV), as shown in some detail in Figure 9.      DDSBs produced (cf [23]: Figure 14). Only a few triple DSBs
Interestingly, the dense clusters of ionizations by these δ-electrons   and hardly any quadruple DSBs are seen. Interestingly, the same
can severely damage dense volumes of hetero chromatin in the cell       tendency is seen whether it is measured as pKu70, pKu80, 53BP1
nucleus mainly by forming dual DSBs on the periphery of their           or pDNApkcs foci with carbon ions or photons. The percentage of
nucleosomes, and they are the most common multiply damaged              DDSBs seems to vary between ≈5-25% and is similar for photons
sites on DNA that are hard to repair for the main cellular repair       and medium LET carbon ions as it is mainly generated by very
processes NHEJ and HR, as indicated in the lower right corner           similar types of δ-electrons. The very extreme cell kills are far
of Figure 4 and Figure 9 [23]. In fact, the DDSB that dominates         from optimal (cf [23]: Figure 13), as they are also associated with
the low LET cell kill ([22, 23]: Figures 5-8) is the key effector       higher cell kill in normal tissues in the entrance and plateau region
of radiation therapy since >99% of the simple ≈75 DSBs per cell         of the beam (cf Figure 27). Interestingly, these severe phenomena
nuclei are perfectly repaired at 2 Gy of low LET and at the same        are mainly linked to heterochromatin, where the nucleosomes are
time there are only 1-2 δ-electrons that can potentially generate       so densely packed that a single δ-electron can reach up to ≈ 2-4
dual DSBs and more commonly kill cells. Light ions generate             nucleosomes on its own. This is also the main reason there are so
≈3 times more δ-electrons, and their RBE is ≈ 3 mainly due to           many more DDSB clusters in heterochromatin (≈ 3.5 fold [23]).




Figure 9: The pink regions show where a high fluence of δ-rays is generated, either in low keV electron or photon beams or ion beams
in their electron slowing down spectra, and they show up in δ-electron and ion RBE distributions. The peak ion biological effectiveness
or RBE appears when the cellular inactivation cross-section saturates at high LETs (upper right panel [48]), since the cross-section
cannot increase with LET any more, and at higher LETs, the biological effectiveness decreases because of a quasiconstant cross-section
and a narrower ion track width, an increasing probability of radical- radical recombination when secondary electrons and ionizations
are generated more and more closely together and an “overkill” effect sets in. The dashed curves are taken from [47] and describe the
average response of the multiple experimental data sets very well (modified from [48]) as the δ-electron multiplicity increases along the
ion track [23]. Interestingly, the peak δ-ray LET (≈25 eV/nm), but the effective LET is almost doubled by multiple scattering, secondary
electron production and multiple scattering detours to ≈50 eV/nm at the track ends (upper right corner and lower right Scol) of ≈500-700
eV electrons (lower panels)! The ion RBE peak at approximately an LET of 120-200 eV/nm thus corresponds to a δ-electron trackend
multiplicity on the ion track of ≈ 3 and higher ([23]: Figures 13 and 14), and an RBE ≈ 3, which is too much overkill as a single or a
couple DDSBs, is generally sufficient, again making boron ions a good alternative to carbon (cf [7]: Figure 16)




12                                                                                                                          Volume 09; Issue 01
Ann Case Rep, an open access journal
ISSN: 2574-7754
Citation: Brahme A (2024) New Radiation Oncology Optimization Principles Based On In-Vivo Predictive Assay and Recent Develop-
ments in Molecular Radiation Biology. Ann Case Report 09: 1625. DOI: 10.29011/2574-7754.101625



Biologically Optimized In Vivo Predictive-Assay Based Treatment Planning
       During the last thirty years, the field of cellular and not least molecular radiation biology has developed substantially and can today
describe the response of heterogeneous tumors and organized normal tissues to radiation therapy quite well. An increased understanding
of subcellular and molecular responses is leading to a more general systems biological approach to radiation therapy and treatment
optimization. It is interesting that most of the characteristics of the tissue infrastructure, such as the genetic make-up (cf Figure 4) as
well as the vascular system and the nutritional and the degree of hypoxia (cf below), must be considered to obtain an accurate description
of tumor and normal tissue responses to ionizing radiation. A brief description of some of the most important concepts, and processes
is possible, starting from the key functional genomics pathways of the cell that are not only responsible for tumor development but
also for the response of the cells to subcellular damage such as radiation therapy. Some of the key mechanisms for cellular damage and
damage repair are discussed above, and the key question is how these repair processes can be brought to interact to inactivate the tumor
without severely damaging surrounding normal tissues using suitable radiation modalities such as light ions, electrons and photons
using biologically optimized radiation intensity- and quality- modulated radiation therapy (IMRT and QMRT [5, 7, 38, 49-51]). The
use of such methods may lead to a truly scientific approach to radiation therapy optimization, not least when in vivo predictive assays
of radiation responsiveness become clinically feasible, as shown in Figure 10 [49, 50]. Brief examples of such an approach using the
efficiency of IMRT showing how sensitive normal tissues can be spared at the same time as highly curative doses are delivered to a
tumor that is often radiation resistant. The present method maximizes the probability of eradicating the tumor, while at the same time,
adverse reactions in sensitive normal tissues at risk are truly minimized using optimal time-dose fractionated IMRT photon electron or
light ion beams.




Figure 10: PET-CT-PC can be used to derive tumor responsiveness information that can be used to plan, verify and biologically optimize
using the in vivo predictive assay based radiation therapy method (cf Figure 3b and BIOART [49-51]). By measuring the tumor cell kill
early in the treatment, 3D in vivo predictive assay information about radiation responsiveness is obtained for accurate prediction of the
optimal dose delivery based on measured hypoxic tumor cell response status and adaptive control [5, 49-51]. Different imaging methods
from various body regions exemplify aspects of the adaptive feedback procedure. The normal tissue responses are approximately known
from historical data [38].



13                                                                                                                           Volume 09; Issue 01
Ann Case Rep, an open access journal
ISSN: 2574-7754
Citation: Brahme A (2024) New Radiation Oncology Optimization Principles Based On In-Vivo Predictive Assay and Recent Develop-
ments in Molecular Radiation Biology. Ann Case Report 09: 1625. DOI: 10.29011/2574-7754.101625



       3D in vivo PET-CT dose delivery monitoring is possible                 initial density of tumor cells given by the first PET-CT image
both with scanned high energy photon and light ion beams,                     just before the treatment.
to further optimize the treatment based on the observed patient
                                                                          •   Information about the density of tumor cells preferably after
specific mean dose delivery. This may differ from the planned
                                                                              approximately 1 week of treatment.
dose delivery without considering organ and patient motions and
set up uncertainties [52]. Both these data sets, when used together,      •   Calculated spatial radiation resistance distribution of the
will allow a high degree of therapy optimization where practically            tumor cells determined from 1 and 2.
all major sources of treatment error can be picked up as long as
                                                                                With this information it is possible to approximate the density
they influence tumor cell survival during the first week or two of
                                                                          of trapped positron emitters owing to the metabolic activity in
therapy, and can thus be corrected for using biologically optimized
                                                                          functional tumor cells. If the PET image approximately quantitates
adaptive treatment techniques. The lower left in vivo dose delivery
                                                                          the density of positron emitters in the tissue such that scatter and
image (Figure 10) was made using 50 MV photon beams in a four-
                                                                          attenuation of the annihilation photons are accurately taken into
field box technique with the help of a 64 slice PET-CT camera
                                                                          account, the imaged emission density PET0 to PET7 ratio is largely
with ≈ 4 mm resolution [53]. Interestingly, the patient was a bit too
                                                                          determined by the effective radiation resistance of the tumor cells
rapidly positioned on the diagnostic couch to not lose too many
                                                                          to fractionation D0,eff (cf Figures 7 and 19 for the definition), as
positron counts, and the left side of the body was partly located
                                                                          shown in the lower left in Figure 11. When this quantity is known,
outside the couch top, causing a substantial rotation (≈20°) of
                                                                          we can use the simple equation for the optimal dose delivery [51,
all the surrounding fatty soft tissues with peak PET activity (no
                                                                          55] to the right in Figure 11, e.g., aiming at 95% tumor cure (ns≈
auto setup on the PET-CT!). Thus, it appears that the whole four-
                                                                          0.05). A correction for the increased vascularization due to the
field box technique was performed with severely oblique beams
                                                                          reduced internal tumor pressure as tumor cells are lost, as seen in
[53]. Even if larger than normal set up errors it indicate a set up
                                                                          the upper part of Figure 11, is also needed. These calculations do
problem that for example may broaden penumbras in regular
                                                                          not take the possible adverse effects on normal tissues into account
treatment procedures. The projection camera (PC, [17]) and PET-
                                                                          but can be performed by physical dose optimization, as further
CT information can be used to verify the BIOART approach. By
                                                                          shown in the upper part of Figure 12, leading to a loss in tumor
measuring the tumor cell kill early in the treatment, 3D in vivo
                                                                          cure by ≈ 15%. Interestingly, the information collected in Figures
predictive assay information about radiation responsiveness is
                                                                          10 and 11 can also be used for a stricter biological treatment.
obtained for accurate prediction of the optimal dose delivery based
on known or estimated hypoxic status (Figures 23 and 24). Both            The Dose- Response Relation of the Tumor and Advanced
with light ions and scanned high energy photon beams, 3D in vivo          Biological Therapy Optimization
PET-CT dose delivery monitoring can adaptively optimize the
                                                                                  For true biological optimization, we really want to know
treatment based on the observed mean dose delivery, which may
                                                                          how to find the dose distribution that maximizes the probability
differ from the planned dose delivery without considering organ
                                                                          of curing the patient without unacceptable or severe normal tissue
and patient motions as seen here. Both these data sets, when used
                                                                          side effects and minimal late sequelae [5, 53]. To this end, we need
together, will allow a high degree of therapy optimization where
                                                                          to quantitate the probability of eradicating the tumor for a given
practically all major sources of treatment error in principle can be
                                                                          dose delivery, while at the same time, we need to know the risk
picked up as long as they influence tumor cell survival and can thus
                                                                          for severe normal tissue damage, as discussed in detail elsewhere
be corrected for using biologically optimized adaptive treatments
                                                                          [5, 54]. Fortunately, the early PET-CT data from the first week
techniques by the “BIOART” technique, shown and quantified in
                                                                          of treatment can be used to quantify the tumor cure probability.
more detail in Figures 11 and 12 [51].
                                                                          According to binomial, Poisson and preferably extreme value
Optimal Dose Distribution for Heterogeneous Tumor Eradication             distribution statistics, the probability of eradicating all clonogenic
                                                                          tumor cells is closely related to e−N, where N is the mean number
       It is possible to express the optimal dose distribution
                                                                          of surviving tumor clonogens, as shown in the lower part of Figure
necessary to eradicate a tumor to any desired probability or cell
                                                                          12 [2, 55]. The interesting property of this expression is that it
density with uniform recurrence probability once the density and
                                                                          includes the individual patient’s initial tumor spread, n(r), and
radiation resistance of the clonogens are known [54]. This allows
                                                                          vasculature data as well as in vivo predictive assay data on tumor
the interesting use of the first three data sets of Figure 10, as shown
                                                                          radiation resistance, D0,eff(r), to make the patient individual tumor
in further detail in Figure 11 based on:
                                                                          response prediction and treatment optimization as reliable as
•    Geometric information about the location of the tumor on the         possible. In true treatment optimization, we now have to combine
     background of normal tissue anatomy and the approximate              the benefit probability of curing the patient: PB with the probability

14                                                                                                                             Volume 09; Issue 01
Ann Case Rep, an open access journal
ISSN: 2574-7754
Citation: Brahme A (2024) New Radiation Oncology Optimization Principles Based On In-Vivo Predictive Assay and Recent Develop-
ments in Molecular Radiation Biology. Ann Case Report 09: 1625. DOI: 10.29011/2574-7754.101625



of avoiding severe injury or adverse reactions: PI. The interesting property of this expression is that it includes the individual patient’s
initial tumor spread and vasculature data as well as in vivo predictive assay data on tumor radiation resistance to make the tumor
response prediction and treatment. Optimization as reliable as possible.




Figure 11: True dose responsiveness imaging applied on a large lung cancer. By taking the ratio of the tumor FDG uptake before therapy
and after a week of treatment and 18 Gy of tumor dose, in this case, it is possible to quantify the change in tumor uptake and the effective
radiation resistance, D0 or D0,eff. From D0,eff and the tumor cell density, it is possible to estimate the optimal dose level necessary for
tumor eradication (lower right panel, [51]) without considering the risk for normal tissue damage, which is generally is fairly low for
light ion and photon IMRT treatments [53].
      If they were statistically independent processes, the probability of achieving a complication-free cure P+ would be simply P+ = PB
(1 – PI). However, in most clinical studies, adverse reactions in normal tissues are often closely correlated to the local control as both
increase with the dose delivery, and a more accurate expression for P+ is given by
                                                   P+ = PB − PI + δ(1− PB) PI          (1)
        Where δ is on the order of 0.2 or lower for many normal tissue tumor configurations [56]. It has been noted that Eq. (1) is a
compromise between the additional cure and injury that is too crude when the dose is increased because some forms of severe treatment-
related morbidity may be considered less desirable than a recurring tumor. However, the statistically independent expression is even
worse, as it corresponds to δ = 1 and the last uncured injury term in Eq. (1): (1− PB) PI is then five times larger. Recently, an even better
way to solve this clinical optimization problem has been developed. This so- called P++ optimization strategy first maximizes P+ by
intensity modulation, selection of optimal beam directions, and radiation modalities [5, 60, 61]. By this P++ approach, the achieved P+ is
then relaxed by a fraction of 1%, and this P+,min value is used as a constraint on P+ not allowing lower values, while instead, the injury PI
is minimized. This strategy almost simultaneously optimizes P+ and minimizes PI by selecting slightly improved angles of incidence and
intensity modulations. A reduction of P+ of 0.5% may result in a decrease in complication probability by as much as 5%. This approach
is, of course, highly desirable, not least in countries where the risk of legal action even after a slight overtreatment may be a reality. The
optimal way to fractionate the treatment plan in Figure 12 is in view of the new fractionation window idea, described in more detail in
Figure 20 and Eq 3!


15                                                                                                                           Volume 09; Issue 01
Ann Case Rep, an open access journal
ISSN: 2574-7754
Citation: Brahme A (2024) New Radiation Oncology Optimization Principles Based On In-Vivo Predictive Assay and Recent Develop-
ments in Molecular Radiation Biology. Ann Case Report 09: 1625. DOI: 10.29011/2574-7754.101625




Figure 12: The optimal dose distribution in Figure 11 can be used as an objective for inverse physical dose therapy optimization (upper
half figure). Even more accurately, the tumor cell density, n(r), and estimated D0, eff(r) of Figure 11 can be used for biologically effective
dose delivery optimization using the clinically observed tumor response and historically observed dose- response data for normal tissue
side effects that are systematically much more similar between patients than the effective tumor response that can vary substantially [56].
Interestingly, the complication-free cure increases from 60% to almost 80% by introducing the biological optimization method based on
the 3D in vivo predictive assay and even one step further by optimal time dose fractionation (cf Figures 4-8, 19, 20 and Eq. (3) [1, 2]),
and it is most ideal for molecular radiation therapy with a few lithium ion beams (see below).
The Quantum Biology of Curative Radiation Therapy
       As shown in Figure 1, both the therapeutic beams and the tumor consist of individual particles and cells, so the ultimate cure
depends on the probability that all remaining tumor cells have truly been hit at the end of the treatment. This means that only a tenth
of a cell can be allowed to survive to have 90% tumor control probability, since that means that out of ten patients, only one will on
average have a single surviving tumor clonogen that may repopulate its tumor (cf Figure 13). Therefore, as in quantum mechanics it is
generally not possible to state the exact state of the patient after a treatment whether he is cured and is alive and well or not, we can only
state the probability range to expect based, e.g., on the ExtremeValue Distribution ([2], cf also “Schrödinger’s cat”). In fact, radiation
therapy is truly the perfect example of an extreme value distribution, as it is well known that only the last few most radiation-resistant
tumor clonogens that survived the initial major part of the treatment (≈60 Gy/70 Gy≈ 85%) without being killed remain to finally form
the tumor control probability curve, as recently described in great detail (Figure 13, [2, 3]). It is therefore not surprising that the tumor
control probability can be rewritten to perfectly follow the cumulative extreme value distribution [2].




16                                                                                                                           Volume 09; Issue 01
Ann Case Rep, an open access journal
ISSN: 2574-7754
Citation: Brahme A (2024) New Radiation Oncology Optimization Principles Based On In-Vivo Predictive Assay and Recent Develop-
ments in Molecular Radiation Biology. Ann Case Report 09: 1625. DOI: 10.29011/2574-7754.101625




Figure 13: The last few radiation treatment fractions will determine the outcome of the treatment, and they are not at all deterministic
as it depends on random hits. To eradicate the last few randomly located tumor clonogens, a too high LET with a high microscopic
standard deviation in dose delivery should not be used. As shown here, the last five 2 Gy fractions of low-ionization-density electron or
photon therapy increase the cure probability from a few percent up to approximately 90%, whereas the last 3.0-3.3 Gy of carbon ions,
on average, may only reach ≈75% (cf Figures 15, 18, 20 and 25). Therefore, with a handful of remaining spread-out tumor clonogens
(Nc ≈ 4, cf Figures 1, 18, and 20), a low LET is essential in finding the optimal way between “Scylla and Charybdis” cf Figure 18. The
present Figure is a bit schematic and not corrected for the relative variance Vr of the carbon ion tumor control curve (≈ pink dotted line,
Figure 18 [2]), but Figures 15, 18a, 20 and 25 are fully corrected (cf also the clinical data in Figures 18b, 26). An increased carbon ion
dose just results more normal tissue injury (Figure 18)!
The Scylla and Charybdis of Radiation Therapy
       Like Odysseus on his travels had to pass through the strait of Messina, he had to be extra careful since on the west Sicilian side,
there were the vortices of Charybdis and on the east Italian peninsula side there were the six headed monster Scylla as shown on the old
Italian map inserted in Figure 13. A similar difficulty faces radiation therapy as we try to raise the dose as much as possible to get rid of
the tumor, but not too much as it may harm the patient. It is well known that the tumor control probability rises steeply first at the end
of the treatment, as shown in Figures 13 and 18. The linear alignment of the DSB´s on the ion track, and the high density of the DNA
damage close to the ion tracks (cf. [3]: Figures 1-5, [23]: Figures 5, 11-13) increases the Relative Biological Effectiveness (RBE) in the
gross tumor, due to increased probability of severe damage when the cell density is high. However, this is a major disadvantage towards
the end of the treatment when the remaining dose is low and very few tumor clonogens are left. These may not be covered completely
owing to the high microscopic heterogeneity and standard deviation in dose delivery [8, 62, 63] at high LETs and the low total doses as
the RBE is high but also due to the high skewness of the extreme value distributions (S≈1.14 cf sec 5.2 and especially the last few GyE
as seen in Figures 13, 15). This is due to the microscopic dose heterogeneity of high-ionization-density ions as shown in Figures 13-18.
Therefore, the normalized dose-response gradient is actually shallower [58, 63-65], resulting in an increased risk for microscopic cold
spots to fall on tumor clonogens. In part, this is due to the lower dose with high LET and thus in total fewer and more aligned DSBs
but equal number of therapeutic DDSB hot (and cold) spots [24], so sufficient cell kill will occur within dense tumor cell populations,
but generally not so likely with only a few remaining tumor clonogens. The random “hot spots” then practically need to hit or come


17                                                                                                                          Volume 09; Issue 01
Ann Case Rep, an open access journal
ISSN: 2574-7754
Citation: Brahme A (2024) New Radiation Oncology Optimization Principles Based On In-Vivo Predictive Assay and Recent Develop-
ments in Molecular Radiation Biology. Ann Case Report 09: 1625. DOI: 10.29011/2574-7754.101625



close to all the remaining clonogens to ensure a high probability of permanent cure and patient survival, which will be less likely, as
seen in Figures 15 and 18. The dose-response gradient γC is therefore shallower at high LETs, as indicated in Figure 13 and clearly seen
in Figures 15, 18a, b, 20 and 24-26 below [2, 8, 47, 63- 66]; in addition, the hypoxia of the tumor should simultaneously be less of a
problem with very few remaining viable tumor cells (cf Figure 22). Using a lower LET toward the end of the treatment can thus reduce
this disadvantage of the high heterogeneity and the resultant lower-dose-response slope at high LET´s. Therefore, a steeper clinical γC
value (cf Table in Figure 15) and higher tumor cure are achieved with less dose delivery and better normal tissue sparing, thus improving
the complication-free cure, as described in further detail in Figures 13-21 and particularly in Figure 18a, b [2].
Influence of Microdosimetric Heterogeneity on the Dose Response Relation
Microdosimetry and nanodosimetry is the science of the stochastic nature of the energy depositions in particle and radiation beams in
general when we go into the microscopic molecular scale of energy depositions so both the beam and the target objects are quantized.
Thus, indeed, one step further than presented in the plain Figure 1. Interestingly, this means that the classical Linear Energy Transfer
(LET) concept is replaced by the stochastic quantity lineal energy: 𝑦 and we have to consider its mean value in a small! m size volume,
such as the frequency and dosimetric mean lineal energy, denoted           and     respectively. These two quantities can now be used to
describe the relative Variance Vr of the energy deposition in different radiation beams simply by taking the ratio / = Vr +1. In Figure
14, this basic microdosimetric quantity has been measured in different radiation therapy beams as a function of the frequency mean
lineal energy in μm size objects. Starting from the left side, we can see that low energy electrons and photons have a low variance, but
in high energy beams it reaches ≈ 5 due to the effect of the slowing down spectrum (cf upper left panel of Figure 9) whereas protons
and π-mesons have 5-10 times more and photo nuclear, fission, and high energy -neutrons 2-5 times the high energy electron and photon
value [8].




Figure 14: The variation of the microscopic relative variance for different radiation modalities. The variance of the energy deposition (Vr
+ 1 = / , where is the dose mean lineal energy value) as a function of the frequency mean lineal energy or ≈ mean LET at different
locations on the depth dose curve. Interestingly, the SOBP has low variance except near the distal edge, where range straggling and very
high LET Bragg peak -values combine to make Vr high. For the SOBP, the frequency mean lineal energy is fairly constant for both
carbon and neon ions, but the plateau in front of it and tail has only marginally lower -values. The unmodulated carbon beam has a much


18                                                                                                                         Volume 09; Issue 01
Ann Case Rep, an open access journal
ISSN: 2574-7754
Citation: Brahme A (2024) New Radiation Oncology Optimization Principles Based On In-Vivo Predictive Assay and Recent Develop-
ments in Molecular Radiation Biology. Ann Case Report 09: 1625. DOI: 10.29011/2574-7754.101625



                                                                           It should be pointed out here that even if the total dose delivery
higher peak -value at its Bragg peak. MeV-electrons, neutrons (50
                                                                           was perfectly uniform until the last week of treatment, what truly
MV photonuclear, fission, and high-energy monochromatic), pi-
                                                                           matters is the microscopic heterogeneity of the last 10 GyE of low
meson, proton and all SOBP ion beams have a rather high variance
                                                                           LET or ≈3 Gy ≈ 10 GyE of high LET on the finally remaining few
in energy deposition. Except for high LET ions and low energy
                                                                           tumor clonogens (approximately five in a curative treatment) that
neutrons this has the advantage that the region of lowest energy
                                                                           lift the cure probability from a few percent to almost 100% as seen
deposition is not too low (few microscopic cold spots) but instead
                                                                           in Figures 13 and 15 (cf [1]: Figure 20). In fact, the shallow final
the mean LET is rather low and so is the biological effectiveness.
                                                                           high LET dashed line dose responses seen in Figure 15 means that
Interestingly, Vr is related to the σm2 = (σD/ )2 of Figure 15 (cf. [8],   approximately 20 GyE finally have to be delivered for high cure
updated with more recent He, C, Ne, Si and Fe data from NIRS).             probability with high LET ions, that is an extra fraction or two,
For light ions, the distal region is also high, meaning that the           and consequently with increased risk for normal tissue damage
biologically important      is high, whereas     is almost constant        as shown in Figure 18! The effect of the microdosimetric relative
over the Spread Out Bragg Peak (SOBP) and not much lower in                standard deviation σm=σD/ on the slope γC of the dose- response
entrance and plateau region for C and Ne ions, whereas helium              relation was pointed out many years ago by approximating the
a-particles have a good normal tissue sparing. It is notable that the      tumor control curve using an over simplified error function [43,
                                                                           63] that by necessity is linked to zero Skewness and a Kurtosis of
Bragg peak has an approximately 5 fold higher value than the
                                                                           3.0. However, the real statistical probability distributions behind
entire SOBP that averages over a large volume. For low LET and
                                                                           the dose- response relation is the extreme value distribution with
   -value radiation, the shape of the tumor dose-response relation         a Skewness ≈ 1.1395 and a Kurtosis of 5.40 independent of the
is accurately described using the binomial, Poisson or even the            number of cells and their effective radiation resistance [2]. This
extreme value statistical probability distributions for having no          results in rather rapid rise in response at low doses and an extended
viable surviving tumor clonogens at the end of the treatment. As           high dose tail making safe high tumor cure the normal tissue
the dose is increased during the treatment, the number of surviving        damage first increases rather rapidly and the complication free
tumor cells is reduced until at high doses, the number of surviving        cure is reduced both on high dose tumor cure side and the low dose
clonogens tends to zero, and the cure probability approaches unity         normal tissue damage side by the skewed extreme probabilities
along a sigmoidal curve, as shown in Figures 13 and 15. The                requiring very high doses and high risks for complications. This
curve shape is reminiscent of the cumulative distribution function         also means that the normal tissue damage first increases rather
of a random variable, which, by definition, also starts from zero          rapidly and the complication free cure is reduced both on the high
and finally reaches one or 100% when all random events have                dose tumor cure side and the low dose normal tissue damage side
been counted. Interestingly, the curve shape is within a few %             by the skewed extreme value distribution (cf Figure 18a, b)! Thus,
described by the cumulative generalized gamma distribution, but            the classical normal probability distribution should be avoided
even more exactly using the perhaps more well-known extreme                for example when considering the influences of dosimetric and
value distribution, which is known to describe the distribution of         microdosimetric uncertainties and tumor and normal tissue
outliers of random processes, when the rest of the distribution is         heterogeneities. In Figure 15, this is thus taken into account by
approximately normal distributed.                                          using the full extreme value distribution according to [2], now also
                                                                           convolved by the microdosimetric relative standard deviations
However, for high LET and         value radiation the microscopic
                                                                           for e− and X-rays, H+, He2+, Li3+, B5+, C6+, and Ne10+ ions
hot spots, due to their very high heterogeneity, naturally increase
                                                                           with σm ≈0.7%, 1.8%, 3%, 4%, 5%, 7%, and 15%, respectively,
the effect on tumor cure and normal tissue damage in randomly
                                                                           for 8 µm diameter cell nuclei (cf [61]: Figure 10 and [47]: Figure
located high-dose regions when there remain many tumor and
normal tissue cells, whereas cold spots delay cure at high doses,          14). The significant reduction in the γC value is clearly seen in
as it becomes increasingly uncertain to hit the last few remaining         Figures 15, 16 18a, b and by the thin line curves in Figures 24 and
most radiation-resistant clonogenic cells by random hot spots as           25, as the microdosimetric relative standard deviation increases
seen in Figures 15 and 16. Interestingly, a switch to electrons/           with increasing atomic weight, LET, and RBE. This problem
photons during the last week of therapy, will recover the steep            has been well known for neutron therapy [8], where the relative
tumor response and a high tumor cure at a lower patient dose               standard deviation is almost as high as for carbon and neon ions
equivalent, as seen in the calculated Ne10++e− curve in Figure 15.         (cf tabulation in Figure 15) partly due to the high LET and low
                                                                           therapeutic dose (≈20-23 Gy).


                                                                                 .

19                                                                                                                             Volume 09; Issue 01
Ann Case Rep, an open access journal
ISSN: 2574-7754
Citation: Brahme A (2024) New Radiation Oncology Optimization Principles Based On In-Vivo Predictive Assay and Recent Develop-
ments in Molecular Radiation Biology. Ann Case Report 09: 1625. DOI: 10.29011/2574-7754.101625




Figure 15: The change in shape of the tumor control probability curve for a uniform cell line using different radiation modalities as a
function of the absorbed dose (upper scale). The lower scale and dashed line curves are normalized to the ≈50% tumor control dose that
is approximately proportional to the dose equivalent, to more clearly see the effect of the microdosimetric relative standard deviation on
the γC value with increasing the LET (cf digital values in the table). Not only are the hot spots often in the form of Dual Double-Strand
Breaks (DDSBs, cf lower right corner of Figure 4; [3]: Figure 2, [24]) and cold regions become more extreme with increasing LET, but
the RBE first increases, thus reducing the total dose by approximately threefold with carbon, neutrons, and neon, increasing the relative
standard deviation, and reducing the γC value more than therapeutically desirable. For mixed high- and low-LET treatments such as neon
ions Ne+e−, an extra upper Gy-equivalent scale is needed.
       The interesting clinical neutron and photon dose- response data set of Lionel Cohen [67, 68] also supports this fact, as was later
analyzed quantitatively and showed a reduction in the dose- response steepness by ≈ 50 % for neutrons, compared with photons, as seen
in the upper left panel of Figures 16 and 18b [69]. This is in good agreement with the data calculated in the tabular portion of Figure
15. Figures 16, 22, 25, and 26 also show in other clinical data that it is difficult to reach γC values above 4 with neutron and carbon
ions almost as calculated for the intrinsic maximum value achievable slope considering the microscopic heterogeneity of the energy
depositions as shown in the lower right corner of Figure 26. It should be pointed out that in the case of the lung tumors as in Figure
26 that are known to be quite hypoxic even though they are sitting in the middle of the lungs as shown by PET imaging e.g. in Figures
10-12. This is due to the fact that high pressure venous blood are pumped from the heart directly to the lungs (≈10 cm distance) for
oxygenation and when it reaches the tumor periphery it squeezes the outer most tumor vessels and thereby reduces the venous blood
flow through the tumor so it is truly hypoxic. Furthermore, the lack of local alveolar regions in the tumor makes it stay strongly hypoxic
as seen in Figure 10 and 11 and first after a weak of therapy (≈18 Gy) and tumor cell loss, the tracer can reach the tumor core. This
is the key mechanism for lung tumor hypoxia and therefore a steeper tumor response is obtained with carbon ions than with photons
even though the intrinsic microdosimetric heterogeneity of high-LET beams limit it to a γC value below ≈ 4 (cf also Figures 22 and 26).
Epidermoid cancer data of Lionel Cohen [68] was probably less hypoxic and the hypoxic advantage of neutrons didn’t really show up
in his data set as seen in Figure 18b. The intrinsic microdosimetric heterogeneity of high-LET beams and their low therapeutic doses


20                                                                                                                        Volume 09; Issue 01
Ann Case Rep, an open access journal
ISSN: 2574-7754
Citation: Brahme A (2024) New Radiation Oncology Optimization Principles Based On In-Vivo Predictive Assay and Recent Develop-
ments in Molecular Radiation Biology. Ann Case Report 09: 1625. DOI: 10.29011/2574-7754.101625



showed early on that a combination of photon and high-LET neutron beams often was advantageous [8, 38, 59, 70]. Figures 17 and 18
further demonstrate how the microdosimetric heterogeneity not only influences the tumor cure but also naturally has a similar reduced
steepness influence on the normal tissue damage curve. It is also seen that the microdosimetric variance actually increases the early rise
in the tumor cure curve mainly due to microscopic hot spots in high densities of clonogenic tumor cells. However, this early advantage
is rapidly lost at high doses due to microscopic cold spots when the clonogenic tumor cell densities and numbers are very low. The rather
low final dose increments in High-LET and high-microscopic heterogeneity treatment will cause microscopic cold spots where some of
the few remaining tumor clonogens may survive and it is equally unlikely that the heterogenic hot spots fall on all the remaining tumor
clonogens. However, after such a noncurative treatment with caspase-3 induced apoptosis, an accelerated repopulation of normal tissues,
as well as of remaining clonogenic tumor cells, may be induced [24].




Figure 16: The clinical neutron and photon dose- response data set of Lionel Cohen (upper left panel). Bone and soft tissue sarcoma,
upper right, are very effectively treated by carbon ions similar to neutrons (PB). However, the normal tissue morbidity is much lower
with ions since the LET in normal tissue is lower for plateau carbon ions than for neutrons, resulting in a significantly increased
complication-free a cure (≈ 85% for carbon ions and ≈ 15% for neutrons). Very good cosmetic results and healing of the bony structures
are seen in the lower and top inserts (cf also Figure 27; Clinical data: NIRS, Chiba, Dose response calculation: Karolinska). Arterial
Venous Malformation obliteration data for helium ion treatments at Berkeley compared to photons (lower left). A clear-cut improvement
in dose response is seen partly due to the increased apoptotic cell kill with intermediate LET Bragg peaks in small-to- medium sized
target volumes. Light ions are probably the modality of choice for these nonmalignant but life-threatening malformations. A comparison
of the 5-year local control for the treatment of chordomas, lower right, by conformal photons, IMRT photons, protons and helium carbon
ions is shown. The right shallow curves with photons (conformal and IMRT), and protons pertain to low LET radiation, whereas the left
curve pertains to carbon ions. The higher γC value and local control with carbon ions may be due to tumor hypoxia similar to lung tumors
(Figure 26). The increased tumor control of ≈ 20% with a ridge filtered beam (NIRS) compared to lateral Bragg peak scanning (GSI)
may partly be due to the increased synergistic effect by simultaneously delivering the low and high LET beam components.



21                                                                                                                        Volume 09; Issue 01
Ann Case Rep, an open access journal
ISSN: 2574-7754
Citation: Brahme A (2024) New Radiation Oncology Optimization Principles Based On In-Vivo Predictive Assay and Recent Develop-
ments in Molecular Radiation Biology. Ann Case Report 09: 1625. DOI: 10.29011/2574-7754.101625




Figure 17: The intrinsic microdosimetric heterogeneity can also be expressed by the Poissonian probability of having a lethal cellular
hit. When probability for no hits, P0, is increased at low doses and high LET´s the probability of random tumor clonogen survival is
getting higher! At 3 Gy carbon ions, the probability of no hit is more than 1%.
Φ =Fluence of ions; σn =Cross-section of nucleus; ν =Hits/cell nucleus.
       The normal tissue damage effects are shown in more detail in Figure 18a, demonstrating that the clinical influence on normal
tissues is reversed since the hot spots in more densely populated normal tissues cause increased damage and thereby further reduce the
complication-free cure. Consequently, both the tumor control steepness and the width of the therapeutic window will shrink with a too
high LET, thereby reducing the probability of achieving complication-free cure, as clearly demonstrated in Figure 18a and b. Thus,
a too elevated LET both reduces tumor cure and increases normal tissue damage, so the selection of optimal LET is truly critical for
maximizing complication-free cure (cf Figures 13-18 and [3]: Figure 22). From this point of view, boron ions are more advantageous
than carbon, at least for medium-sized tumors [7] and a low LET round up may be the optimal way to recover a steep response and a
high complication free cure with boron and heavier ions. Here, we can conclude that at the end of the treatment, the lowest possible
LET is optimal to minimize the significant dose heterogeneity effects and simultaneously minimize the normal tissue injury (cf Figures
18a, b and 21). This calls for high-energy electron or photon IMRT or even QMRT, as seen from the table in Figure 15. In addition to
the radiation modality or ion species and the tumor clonogen number, there are several other clinical factors influencing the steepness
of the dose response relation. One of these factors is the heterogeneity of the tumor with regard to cell numbers and their sensitivities,
as determined by cellular differentiation, the degree of hypoxia, and the nutritional status (cf Figures 24-26, [6, 64-66]). Some of these
heterogeneity factors, such as hypoxia, are actually reduced with an elevated LET, but the intrinsic ion heterogeneity is still limiting the
highest possible γC value and will limit this positive influence on the hypoxic γ value (see the tabulation in Figure 15 and Figure 26; more
details are provided in the recent overviews (cf [2] and [49]: Figures 8.5n, 8.10, 8.23c).




22                                                                                                                         Volume 09; Issue 01
Ann Case Rep, an open access journal
ISSN: 2574-7754
Citation: Brahme A (2024) New Radiation Oncology Optimization Principles Based On In-Vivo Predictive Assay and Recent Develop-
ments in Molecular Radiation Biology. Ann Case Report 09: 1625. DOI: 10.29011/2574-7754.101625




Figure 18a: A A too-high LET have adverse effects both on the complication-free cure (P+) as it reduces the high dose tumor cure and
simultaneously increases normal tissue injury (dashed lines; solid lines: [38, 51]: Figure 4, [71]). Interestingly, there is a very cost-
efficient clinical solution to this problem: by switching to electrons, photons, and in special cases even protons during the last week of
treatment. This will lead to a steeper tumor response ([1]: Figures 20 and 22, [7]: Figure 16, [49]: Figures 8.10 a, b), generating a higher
complication-free cure, all at a lower delivered dose equivalent (see Figure 15 for Ne + e-) and reduced risk of damaging normal tissues,
as demonstrated here. P (D$) is the probability of tumor control or normal tissue damage as a function of the mean tumor dose (cf also
Figure 18b).


.




23                                                                                                                         Volume 09; Issue 01
Ann Case Rep, an open access journal
ISSN: 2574-7754
Citation: Brahme A (2024) New Radiation Oncology Optimization Principles Based On In-Vivo Predictive Assay and Recent Develop-
ments in Molecular Radiation Biology. Ann Case Report 09: 1625. DOI: 10.29011/2574-7754.101625




 Figure 18b: Clear clinical neutron and photon dose response data showing the reduction in complication free cure by a too high
microscopic heterogeneity in dose delivery using neutron therapy. The adverse effect of a too-high LET on the complication-free cure
reduces the tumor cure and simultaneously increases normal tissue injury (doted lines and lower DEq scale for neutrons; solid lines and
upper scale: from [67] and [59]: Figure 9,). Interestingly, the cost-efficient clinical solution is to switch to electrons or photons the last
week of therapy with very few remaining hypoxic tumor clonogens and reduced need for high LET dose delivery. Interestingly, the
effective RBE for the tumor and normal tissue responses are very similar as also shown in Figure 18a. The loss in dose response slope
does not change the dose interwall between the curves but mainly the complication free cure distance between them as especially seen
at peak P+ around 78 GyE! P+ for simplicity determined from Eq (1) with δ ≈ 0.
Optimal Time Dose Fractionation
       The rapid and efficient repair of sublethal damage induced by low LET radiation between ≈ 0.5-2.3 Gy can be used to optimize the
treatment outcome during fractionated radiation therapy. Most normal tissues poses a general low-ionization density daily fractionation
window as seen in Figure 19 [2, 3, 38, 71, 72], as was mentioned in connection with Figures 4- 7. In fact, to minimize the effect of the
LDHS, in normal tissue there exists an optimal daily fractionation window at approximately 1.5- 2.3 Gy/fraction where the shallowest
tangent from the origin touches the cell survival curve at approximately 2 Gy (cf. Figures 7 and 19). This is therefore the optimal
dose/fraction to an organ at risk near the tumor when very high therapeutic doses to the tumor must be delivered. Using such a dose
per treatment fraction in the normal tissues around the tumor also means that the tumor dose is significantly higher, by a factor of
approximately 1.2- 2, and the tumor will suffer significantly more damage, especially with mutated DNA repair genes. The fact, that the
2 Gy/Fr dose level has been generally used over the last 70 years in clinical radiation therapy to maximize cure and minimize normal
tissue damage, which indirectly supports the existence of the LDHS phenomenon in most normal tissues as explained in molecular terms
in Figures 4 and clinically in Figures 6, 7 and 19. As discussed above the first quarter to half Gy induces Low Dose Apoptosis (LDA)
to avoid mutations in normal tissues before full DNA repair is induced at about half a Gy. It is then optimal to deliver a further dose of
≈1.5 Gy with full repair capacity induced and a very shallow dose response as seen in Figure 19. At higher doses the risk For High Dose
Apoptosis (HDA) induction instead becomes a problem as seen in to the right in Figure 4.




24                                                                                                                           Volume 09; Issue 01
Ann Case Rep, an open access journal
ISSN: 2574-7754
Citation: Brahme A (2024) New Radiation Oncology Optimization Principles Based On In-Vivo Predictive Assay and Recent Develop-
ments in Molecular Radiation Biology. Ann Case Report 09: 1625. DOI: 10.29011/2574-7754.101625




Figure 19: The fast low-dose initiation of full DNA repair first causes low-dose hypersensitivity and apoptosis but is followed by
almost a plateau of effective repair and improved cell survival per unit dose. In normal tissues, there is therefore a daily fractionation
window ≈ 2 Gy/Fr (≈1.8- 2.3 Gy, [2]: Figure 5), where the least detrimental response is obtained (SF2 ≈ 0.52 and D0,eff ≈ 3.1 Gy) for
a given therapeutic dose level having to be delivered to the neighboring tumor volume (cf Eq 3). The dashed curve shows how the
surviving fraction at 2 Gy (SF2) varies with the dose per fraction on the horizontal axis, having a clear maximum near 2 Gy. This is
probably the main reason why in classical radiation therapy, where the tumor and normal tissue doses were often rather similar, the
dose was best tolerated ≈ 2 Gy per fraction. For light ions with largely a low LET in normal tissues, such as lithium to boron ions, the
normal tissue dose should preferably also be in this range unless there is a substantial high LET dose spillover to critical normal tissues
surrounding the tumor region. With well-optimized IMRT dose delivery, the tumor dose could simultaneously be ≈ 1.5 or more times
higher, and in addition, the biological effectiveness is significantly increased. This makes the total increase in therapeutic effect in the
tumor approximately two to three times higher and more, particularly for smaller tumors. Unfortunately, this recommendation was not
well understood by the community, who conservatively continued giving 2 Gy/Fr to the tumor. Now is the time to change, as discussed
in further detail around Eq (3).
       In addition to this daily fractionation window, by giving higher doses per fraction on days where there is a longer time for sublethal
damage repair before the next treatment, it is largely possible to compensate for the two missing dose fractions over the weekend and
thereby better maximize HR repair. The optimal weekly fractionation window is illustrated in full detail in Figure 20, showing that simply
by increasing the dose on Friday and utilizing the weekend for repair (cf insert), a gain in complication-free cure (P+) of approximately
6% can be achieved. Due to the effective weekend repair, the dose fraction on Monday could also be increased to gain a further 3% in
P+. A total gain in P+ of approximately 12% is possible by giving high doses Monday morning and Friday evening, lower doses Tuesday
and Thursday evening, and rather high doses midday on Wednesday and the last day of treatment, as seen in Figure 20 [3, 72].

25                                                                                                                          Volume 09; Issue 01
Ann Case Rep, an open access journal
ISSN: 2574-7754
Citation: Brahme A (2024) New Radiation Oncology Optimization Principles Based On In-Vivo Predictive Assay and Recent Develop-
ments in Molecular Radiation Biology. Ann Case Report 09: 1625. DOI: 10.29011/2574-7754.101625




Figure 20: Improvement in complication-free cure by up to 12% (P+, right scale), using an optimal weekly fractionation schedule to
make the weekend free from treatments and maximizing the sublethal damage HR repair in normal tissues as seen in the lower right
insert. The insert also shows decreased reparability with key DNA repair genes knocked out [3, 39]. The fast NHEJ is clearly separated
from the slow HR repair, especially for wt1 and wt2. As expected, the fast part was almost totally lost for the Lig4 knockout cell line.
Interestingly, the improved normal tissue repair capability is particularly valuable during the last week of treatment when the tumor
burden is reduced and normal tissues suffer the most after a several weeks of treatment. Nevertheless, the last treatment fraction should
be high to use the extra repair potential at the end of treatment. Clearly, the advantage of a low-LET round-up after a high-LET treatment
will generally optimize the whole treatment procedure, not least using the present fractionation approaches. As seen in the middle row
of cells and violet numbers, a low LET round up regain the highest possible P+.
       High-dose fractions should be given only when there is a longer delay until the next dose fraction: either more than 60 h over
weekends or more than 29 h when followed by a lower dose. Such a fractionation schedule maximizes the use of sublethal DNA damage
repair particularly via the HR pathway in tumor-surrounding normal tissues. The tumor, often with a mutated TP53 gene and/or repair
genes (e.g., ATM and DNApk), has no advantage with a 60- 100% longer repair time, as shown in the lower left insert in Figure 20 (cf
[3]: Figure 10 and its accompanying table). Furthermore, as shown in the lower left insert in Figure 20, this dose level also allows NHEJ
to function very effectively daily, and HR to ≈ 50+ % over the weekend for most normal tissues. To conclude, if the dose per fraction
to normal tissue is approximately 2 Gy and the dominating NHEJ repair pathway is intact, a normal tissue, minimal damage weekly
fractionation window is established [2, 39, 72], as inherently described by the current repair model; and it applies to all ions from helium
almost up to boron ions (cf Figure 32 and [1]: Figure 7) by most importantly largely avoiding an elevated LET´s in normal tissues!




26                                                                                                                          Volume 09; Issue 01
Ann Case Rep, an open access journal
ISSN: 2574-7754
Citation: Brahme A (2024) New Radiation Oncology Optimization Principles Based On In-Vivo Predictive Assay and Recent Develop-
ments in Molecular Radiation Biology. Ann Case Report 09: 1625. DOI: 10.29011/2574-7754.101625


The 4D-Space-Time of Ion Therapy Optimization                          periphery of the initial internal target volume [83] may only harbor
                                                                       a lower density of tumor cells either due to microscopic growth or
Interestingly, the proposed switch to a low LET simultaneously
                                                                       diffusion of tumor cells and/or to an added setup margin to account
increases the steepness of the dose- response relation and thus
                                                                       for organ motions and establish set up uncertainties [83], as seen
enhances the therapeutic window and increases the complication-
                                                                       in Figure 21. Independent of the exact reason, this margin is also
free cure through less normal tissue injury and simultaneously
                                                                       unlikely to harbor high numbers of hypoxic or radiation-resistant
solving all the high-LET heterogeneity problems indicated in Fig-
                                                                       tumor cells, and it therefore does not truly benefit from an elevated
ures 13-21. The reason it works so well, is that there is no longer
                                                                       LET treatment that unfortunately is likely to cause unnecessary
an excessive microdosimetric variance in the final dose delivery,
                                                                       normal tissue damage, as discussed above and explained in Figure
causing an increased dose response steepness, less normal tissue
                                                                       18. Therefore, the last part of the second-to-last week of therapy
damage, and a higher curative response. In retrospect, there is ac-
                                                                       may also benefit from a switch to low-LET irradiation (see the few
tually a clinical demonstration of the value of using low-LET dose
                                                                       tumor clonogens in the penumbra region in Figure 21), although
delivery in addition to high-LET treatments in the interesting US
                                                                       now possibly together with a dedicated high-LET boost but only
clinical trials of neutron therapy. Not only was it shown that the
                                                                       to the original gross tumor volume that still may harbor some
first ever gantry- mounted about 1m thick pure electrolytic iron
                                                                       hypoxic or radiation-resistant clonogenic tumor cells [4, 8, 47, 63,
multileaf collimator (to minimize neutron activation) in Seattle
                                                                       66, 69]. Interestingly, the last week and a half of the treatment can
provided much less normal tissue damage than the ordinarily used
                                                                       thus largely be considered a low-LET treatment of the periphery
block collimation inserts (grade 3 and 4 cumulative late normal tis-
                                                                       of the four-dimensional space- time internal target volume [83], as
sue toxicity rates was reduced from 39% >10% [71]) but also the
                                                                       shown in Figure 21, for simplicity and clarity drawn assuming an
use of mixed beam treatments where a photon addition was found
                                                                       initial cubic tumor volume. The target volume is shown to shrink
to be quite advantageous, as discussed in detail elsewhere [8, 49,
                                                                       in the fourth time dimension for simplicity and clarity and to obtain
73-82]. The above discussion was not too well understood at that
                                                                       a real 4D perspective. The true tumor volume may shrink slightly
time, and the results could most likely have been improved even
                                                                       during treatment but not necessarily, e.g., if we truly manage to
further, as discussed here, but it is not excluded that the somewhat
                                                                       induce massive senescence (cf Figure 31, [6] and [42-44]). The
better dose delivery with photons may also have contributed to
                                                                       initial setup margin (pale pink) and the few remaining gross tumor
the improvements even if a small net survival advantage was seen
                                                                       clonogenic cells at the beginning of the last week of therapy
with neutrons for prostate cancer [79]. Interestingly, the optimal
                                                                       (green volume in Figure 21) are all randomly located in the 4D
transition from a high to low LET should be when only a handful
                                                                       space- time internal target volume [83]. This volume will benefit
of tumor clonogens remain and most of the severe hypoxia is gone,
                                                                       from the lowest possible LET to secure the highest complication-
preferably following the last weekend of neutron or ion treatments,
                                                                       free cure and steepest possible tumor response, avoiding tumor
giving an extra valuable HR-dependent DNA repair and hopefully
                                                                       microdosimetric cold spots as well as avoiding peripheral organs
a tissue reoxygenation boost, as shown by the insert of Figure 20.
                                                                       at risk of hotspot damage with high-LET beams (Figure 18 and [3]:
     In fact, the discussion above about the last week of therapy      Figures 20 and 22, [7]).
should also apply at least partly to the previous week because the




Figure 21: A cubic 4D space- time internal target volume is projected on a 2D flat surface showing the need for low-LET electrons
or photons to round up an optimally performed high LET light ion treatment. Like a 3D cube in 2D is two squares with all corners
connected, and a 4D cube in 3D is two 3D cubes with all their cubical corners connected, in this case with the blue fourth dimension
time arrows connecting the pink and green cube corners in this Figure. The periphery of the 4D internal target volume [81], including
the initial setup margin (pale pink) and the few remaining gross tumor clonogenic cells (green volume), will substantially benefit from
the last 10- 15 GyE being delivered with minimal LET and microdosimetric variance using electron or photon beams. Interestingly,
both the few remaining clonogenic tumor cells in the gross tumor and the setup margin are best eliminated with an optimized 15 GyE
low-LET treatment round-up, and for bulky tumors, the first 5 GyE of those may include a concomitant higher-LET initial gross tumor
boost in case of a possible risk of an hypoxic remainder [8]. This is different from the fractional 4D problem of dynamic therapy [84].
Accounting for Tumor Hypoxia
      The biological effect of low-to-medium LET radiation is dependent on the local oxygen concentration in the cells since oxygen
radicals then mediate a substantial part of the cell death. Often, this makes well oxygenated normal tissues suffer radiation treatment
more than generally hypoxic tumors. With low LET, an often 2- 3 times higher dose is needed to eradicate hypoxic tumor cells compared
to well-oxygenated tumor cells. For high LET radiation, such as light ions, this so-called oxygen enhancement ratio is reduced for
hypoxic tumors (OER≈1.5- 1.7). Furthermore, light ion Bragg peaks that are applied only in the tumor volume further improve this fact



27                                                                                                                         Volume 09; Issue 01
Ann Case Rep, an open access journal
ISSN: 2574-7754
Citation: Brahme A (2024) New Radiation Oncology Optimization Principles Based On In-Vivo Predictive Assay and Recent Develop-
ments in Molecular Radiation Biology. Ann Case Report 09: 1625. DOI: 10.29011/2574-7754.101625



since the high dose and LET are then mainly present in hypoxic tumor cells and not in normal tissues. With QMRT, the highest LET
Bragg peaks could even be reserved for the hypoxic core of the tumor [49-52].The clinical problems of a very small hypoxic tumor cell
fraction (10-5) affects an otherwise well-oxygenated tumor are clearly demonstrated in Figure 22. In the first approximation, it does not
matter whether the cells are spread out or nodal. The blue curve shows the response of the well oxygenated fraction as a function of the
dose equivalent in GyE, so the same curve holds approximately for photons and carbon ions (the real carbon curve slope should due to
heterogeneity effects actually be more similar to the red curve). The difference comes from the few hypoxic cells that are easily cured by
the carbon ions, dotted red curve, so the total tumor is just shifted a GyE or two. With photons, the hypoxic cells need some 15 Gy extra
(dotted pink curve) due to their high OER, so they totally dominate the tumor response, and these few most resistant cells determine the
low clinical response slope γC ≈3 a severe reduction from the oxic value of almost 7 for ≈ 5 cm tumor (γC ≈lnN/e, cf Figure 13).




Figure 22: A very small hypoxic compartment can totally dominate a low LET treatment, whereas with higher LET lithium and carbon
ions, they are not such a big problem and only marginally increase the effective dose needed for cure. With increasing hypoxia, D37 (and
D50), the low LET dose causing 37% (and 50%) tumor cure, increases rapidly, as seen in the right insert. However, the normalized slope
(γ37)of the dose‒response relation (DRR) first decreases at low LET values as the hypoxic fraction increases due to increasing tumor
heterogeneity and a dominating small hypoxic compartment and then increases as most of the tumor clonogens become hypoxic (cf
Figure 26 insert). The figure shows how the loss in (γ37) and increase in D37 and D50 are substantially smaller with high LET lithium or
carbon ions, as shown in more detail in Figures 24-26.




28                                                                                                                        Volume 09; Issue 01
Ann Case Rep, an open access journal
ISSN: 2574-7754
Citation: Brahme A (2024) New Radiation Oncology Optimization Principles Based On In-Vivo Predictive Assay and Recent Develop-
ments in Molecular Radiation Biology. Ann Case Report 09: 1625. DOI: 10.29011/2574-7754.101625




Figure 23: Illustration of how a reduced density and increased randomness in the geometric distribution of blood vessels reduces
oxygenation, particularly at large distances from the vessels, and increases the number of cells with significant hypoxia (Po2 < 5%).
The color look up table (lower left scale) was adopted from that of hypoxic tissue markers (lower right insert, courtesy van der Kogel).
The vascular model of oxygen diffusion as seen to the right is given here by the solid line cellular oxygenation curves and often agrees
very well with many clinically observed Eppendorf data sets for tumors (pink panels with gray histograms in the left half) and normal
tissues (blue panels with open histograms in the right half). It is clearly seen that most tumors have a significantly low oxygenation and
radiation-resistant cell fraction as opposed to most normal tissues that are well oxygenated and radiation-sensitive and lack a severe
hypoxic cell fraction that characterizes hypoxic tumors.
      The change in oxygenation status in 25 cubic cm-sized pieces of tissue of varying vascular density (x-axis) and vascular
heterogeneity (y-axis) are shown in Figure 23. The calculated oxygen tension distribution in a section of the cube is color coded the
same way as the experimental tumor sample [85,86]. In the right half, the average oxygenation curves of each cube are shown (solid line
curves) in rather good agreement with experimental Eppendorf histogram data (tumors: pink shading, normal tissues: blue shading [86]).




29                                                                                                                        Volume 09; Issue 01
Ann Case Rep, an open access journal
ISSN: 2574-7754
Citation: Brahme A (2024) New Radiation Oncology Optimization Principles Based On In-Vivo Predictive Assay and Recent Develop-
ments in Molecular Radiation Biology. Ann Case Report 09: 1625. DOI: 10.29011/2574-7754.101625




Figure 24: Overview of how the effective DRR is influenced by the LET off the beam from 0.2 eV/nm photons via 25, 50 to 100 eV/nm
carbon ions for each cubic tissue type taken from Figure 23. Interestingly, the medium LET in the neighborhood of 25 eV/nm is most
efficient for most hypoxic tumors (pink background), whereas X-rays or electrons are optimal for more well-oxygenated tumor tissues
such as nonradiation-resistant tumors (lower right corner, blue background, cf Figure 18b).
       It is quite clear that a low vascular density and high heterogeneity are characteristics of most hypoxic tumors in the upper left
corner of the diagram. The oxygenation curves in Figure 23 are converted to dose response relations of varying steepness as the hypoxic
fraction and mean LET increase, generally requiring higher doses as the hypoxic fraction increases, as seen in Figure 24. Furthermore,
it is seen how a small hypoxic fraction in a tumor significantly reduces the slope of the DRR with low LET photons (cf Figure 22).
Interestingly, the most advantageous dose‒response relationship with the lowest equivalent dose to the patient is generally at a quite low
mean LET near 25 eV/nm (Unfortunately, the effect of microdosimetric heterogeneity is not considered in Figures 22-24). However,
since the microdosimetric heterogeneity mainly affects the higher LET curves, the conclusions are still largely valid. To show the
detailed effect of the microdosimetric heterogeneity, Figure 25 shows a close-up of Figure 22, where some of the key light ions (Li, B, C)
are compared with photons (and electrons). Here, the effective RBE of the ions is also considered, as seen by the fine red lines for carbon
ions, and the hypoxic fraction was doubled to make it slightly closer to common clinical situations requiring 64-68 Gy with photons. An
RBE of ≈ 1.5 is sufficient to make the hypoxic fraction have a marginal influence on the hypoxic dose response relation for carbon ions,
and boron is rather similar, with a few percent higher PB. Lithium ions can bring the γc value up to 5 and may reach an increase in PB
of ≈ 10% compared to carbon. However, the principal gain with these lighter ions is actually in the lower LET in normal tissues, largely
recovering the fractionation window of photons and electrons (cf Figures 6 and 7, [2]).




30                                                                                                                         Volume 09; Issue 01
Ann Case Rep, an open access journal
ISSN: 2574-7754
Citation: Brahme A (2024) New Radiation Oncology Optimization Principles Based On In-Vivo Predictive Assay and Recent Develop-
ments in Molecular Radiation Biology. Ann Case Report 09: 1625. DOI: 10.29011/2574-7754.101625




Figure 25: A more detailed study of the dose response relation of hypoxic tumors taking the microdosimetric heterogeneity of the ions
into account (cf Figures 15, 18 and 22, [2]). An RBE of ≈ 1.5 is almost sufficient to make the hypoxic carbon response equal to that of
well-oxygenated cells (thin and thick red curves, γ37 ≈4.2). However, boron and lithium ions with γ37 values of ≈4.7 and 5.3, respectively,
may reach this RBE and thus have a 10% higher cure probability than carbon ions. Of course, this is only a mildly hypoxic tumor but
a rather common kind requiring ≈ 66 Gy photons for 90% cure probability. The new approach switching to electrons, photons or even
protons in the last 10 GyE may still be even better, especially for severely hypoxic tumors. Many clinical tumors are close to the lowest
γ37 value (≈2-3.1 as in this case) due to hypoxia, and lithium to boron ions can bring this low point back up to γ37 ≈ 4-5 region with a
steeper and more effective dose response not least with a well-designed low LET round up!




31                                                                                                                         Volume 09; Issue 01
Ann Case Rep, an open access journal
ISSN: 2574-7754
Citation: Brahme A (2024) New Radiation Oncology Optimization Principles Based On In-Vivo Predictive Assay and Recent Develop-
ments in Molecular Radiation Biology. Ann Case Report 09: 1625. DOI: 10.29011/2574-7754.101625




Figure 26: Comparison of Clinical results using photons with carbon 12 ions showing an advantageous steep DRR for lung tumors.
There is significant improvement in efficiency, and cure compared to conventional radiation therapy. The increased steepness improves
the therapeutic window and is due to a more efficient killing of hypoxic tumor cells. The change in the normalized dose- response slope
as a function of the hypoxic fraction and ion species is shown in the lower right insert. The normalized slope of the Dose Response
Relation (γ37) in the first approximation decreases in low LET beams as the hypoxic fraction increases due to the increasing tumor
heterogeneity with a dominating small hypoxic compartment, as seen in Figure 22. After ½ % hypoxia, it starts to increase again as most
of the tumor clonogens become hypoxic (decreasing tumor heterogeneity). However, as the microdosimetric heterogeneity comes into
play in beams of increasing LET, the intrinsic loss in γ to γMax (cf. Figures 15- 18) limits the regain in slope, as shown by the inserted blue
curve. This effect will be less pronounced in the low D37 values shown in Figure 22 but may influence the D50 and D90 values. Most
of the loss in the dose- response slope for photons is due to hypoxia. The variation in sensitivity over the cell cycle [3] and with tumor
stage can also affect the response slope, not least for photons.
      The clinical data on hypoxic lung tumors treated by carbon ions and photons are summarized in Figure 26, clearly showing the
value of higher doses and less normal tissue limitations by carbon ions even though the γC value is fairly low, as expected from their
microdosimetric heterogeneity. It is still significantly better than that for photon treatments, partly due to a larger influence of hypoxia
but also due to a wider range of tumor sizes and other photon-related tumor heterogeneities. It is most likely that this group of small lung
tumors (T1-T2) could advantageously be treated with lithium ions resulting in fewer normal tissue reactions.
Radiation Quality
      From the interesting cell survival curves in Figures 5-7 and dose response relations for photons and light ions in Figures 15, 16,
22, 24-26, one can naturally ask which beams are most suitable for radiation treatments to minimize adverse reactions in normal tissues
and maximize the complication-free cure.




32                                                                                                                            Volume 09; Issue 01
Ann Case Rep, an open access journal
ISSN: 2574-7754
Citation: Brahme A (2024) New Radiation Oncology Optimization Principles Based On In-Vivo Predictive Assay and Recent Develop-
ments in Molecular Radiation Biology. Ann Case Report 09: 1625. DOI: 10.29011/2574-7754.101625




Figure 27: Depth dose and LET distributions for the 5 lightest ions after protons: helium, lithium, beryllium, boron, carbon and neon
that were carefully tested at Berkeley. The dose fraction delivered at an ionization density below 10 eV/nm is unshaded because when
an ion passes, a 2 nm DNA string less than 20 eV is on average deposited, so no local ionization is generally obtained on average, as
seen inserted in the upper middle panel. It is clearly seen that lithium has a high ionization density only in the Bragg peak, whereas
carbon has it 5 cm in front and 10 cm behind the Bragg peak. Lithium is therefore the most conformal radiation modality, only providing
significant apoptosis and senescence in the few mm Bragg peak, which is perfect for inducing programmed cell death only by its peak
ionization (cf [6]). The high LET component increases rapidly from only a few percent for protons and 50% for helium and 80% for
lithium. For carbon, the high LET region extends ≈5 centimeters in front of the Bragg peak and ≈10cm behind it. Beryllium and boron
ions are located between lithium and carbon and are of interest for medium size tumors.
This question was recently discussed in some detail [2, 3, 6, 7, 23], and many of the new biological ideas discussed here may need
renewed consideration. The classical quantities discussed in the photon era are the penumbra width (P80-20≈3-5 mm), skin dose (D0.5≈30-
40%) and HVD (R50) dose max depth (R100), and with electrons, the therapeutic and projected range (R85, RP) and bremsstrahlung
background (DX≈1-5%) need to be added. With light ions, many of these are still highly relevant, such as penumbra width, skin dose and
fragmentation tail (DFr), which can become quite substantial from carbon and beyond, as seen in Figure 27. To look close up on what is
probably the most interesting ion for radiation therapy of bulky tumors: boron 8, and to compare it with the presently dominating carbon
12 ion, their dose and LET distributions are assembled together in Figure 28. Most interesting is that we can see a significant reduction
in the plateau region ionization density with boron 8 ions (and 11 cf Figure 27). Not only is all the medium LET region of carbon
replaced by low LET boron ions, but the ≈5 cm wide high LET region in front of the carbon ion Bragg peak is only 2 cm with boron
ions, and the fragmentation tail is practically all low LET. Interestingly, this will increase boron apoptosis and senescence in the tumor
and simultaneously reduce it in normal tissues, as recently demonstrated experimentally ([1]: Figs. 7, 9, 10, [2]: Figs. 3, 6,[3]: Fig. 22,
[7]: Figs. 4, 16). The only drawback is that Boron 8 is unfortunately difficult to produce since it is our lightest β+ emitter with a half-life
of just under a second. Interestingly, this makes it possible to visualize the dose delivery in real time during treatment by whole-body
PET- CT imaging. This is possible since the acceleration is fast (msec) and as the ion comes to rest in the tumor, it will emit its positron
within a second or two so it has to be imaged during treatment unless the treatment is done in a fraction of a second and the patient can
instantly be moved to the PET-CT camera (20% is left after ≈1.8 s). It is possible to produce boron 8 in flight in a boron 10 beam on a

33                                                                                                                            Volume 09; Issue 01
Ann Case Rep, an open access journal
ISSN: 2574-7754
Citation: Brahme A (2024) New Radiation Oncology Optimization Principles Based On In-Vivo Predictive Assay and Recent Develop-
ments in Molecular Radiation Biology. Ann Case Report 09: 1625. DOI: 10.29011/2574-7754.101625



liquid deuterium target, but the yield is quite low (less than 0.001 [87] as two neutrons need to be removed). It will probably be more
efficient to use a beryllium 9 beam on a liquid hydrogen target to knock out a single proton and use the filtration techniques developed
at Karolinska for [88-90, cf also 91, 92], or the interesting method developed at CERN may even be the most optimal approach [93].
The SOBP method generates strong variations in ionization density and absorbed dose. The variation is a factor of approximately two
over the whole target volume for carbon ions, with a too low LET at the anterior end and too low dose and too high LET at the distal
part of target volume, as seen in Figure 29. This significantly increases the risk of microscopic cold spots at the distal part of the target
volume ([3]: Fig 22, [7]: Fig 16). A more scientific approach would be to use mixed-modality treatments that can make the absorbed dose
and biological effect almost constant, as seen in Figure 30 [3, 7, 39, 47, 95], or even locally elevated, e.g., in regions of strong hypoxia
[2, 47, 66, 86, 95]. The very flexible method of mixing two ions with largely different ionization densities ([7, 39, 53, 86, 95,96], such as
He or Li and B or C, is more flexible than using the Spread-Out Bragg Peak method, which in fact, works well only for protons, as seen
in Figure 29. The very high distal LET and very low dose, as seen in this figure in a region that is largely consisting of a set up margin,
is a suboptimal treatment considering heterogeneity and side effects.
What truly requires new thinking is the 4-dimensional aspects discussed in Figures 20 and 21, such as the time dose fractionation, the
internal target volume and the quantum biology effects the last weeks of the treatment, and they are very important to consider (cf.
Figure 21; counting dose, energy and lineal energy is actually already 7 dimensions). The new idea to more seriously consider the
microdosimetric heterogeneity of the beams (cf. Figures 13-18) and to take it into account, especially the last week and a half of the
treatment [2], is an interesting opportunity to at the same time recover the steep dose response relations, e.g., of well oxygenated head
and neck cancers for photons (γC ≈5-6 [69]). Interestingly, this can be achieved by switching the last week of an ion treatment to a low
LET




Figure 28: Carbon ion with superimposed boron ion beam depth dose and energy deposition density distributions (LET) for biological
effect comparison. The adverse biological effects of carbon ions in the entrance and fragmentation tail regions are significantly reduced
by boron ions (blue shading). With sensitive organs at risk in front of and behind the tumor volume, the high LET reduction will also be
a further important advantage of boron ions, as they will generate more apoptosis in the tumor than carbon ions, as recently demonstrated
[1-3, 7]. Interestingly, this is also likely to partly reestablish the important low LET fractionation window of photons in normal tissues
with boron ions (cf Figure 7, and [2]: Figure 5)! Unfortunately, the carbon ions also get far too dense DDSB clusters toward the Bragg
peak, as shown recently ([23]: Figures 13 and 14), also indicating the need for lighter ions.

34                                                                                                                          Volume 09; Issue 01
Ann Case Rep, an open access journal
ISSN: 2574-7754
Citation: Brahme A (2024) New Radiation Oncology Optimization Principles Based On In-Vivo Predictive Assay and Recent Develop-
ments in Molecular Radiation Biology. Ann Case Report 09: 1625. DOI: 10.29011/2574-7754.101625




Figure 29: The relative biological effectiveness varies over the SOBP. This will make the dose at the distal target volume low and LET
very high, making the risk for microscopic cold spots high and increasing the risk for a recurrent tumor [2]. Two perpendicular high-
energy electrons and photons, beams make a sharper and better high-dose dose distribution than a proton SOBP even if the dose behind
the tumor is lower with p (but accompanied with neutrons [7, 8]), making He, Li, B, and C ions most interesting from a therapeutic point
of view. With B or C ions and He or Li ions, the method with two different intensity modulated beams will eliminate the single beam
SOBP problem above, as shown in more detail in Figure 30. round up with minimal microscopic dose delivery heterogeneity, and thus
at a time when the most severe hypoxia is gone. Thus, replacing the last one or two ion treatment fractions by 10-15 Gy preferably using
electrons or photons but also protons will do, e.g., at an ion center, as discussed in further detail in Figure 21 above.
      Apoptosis is nature’s own way to eliminate unwanted cells during the development of practically all organs and is therefore not
generally associated with an inflammatory response accompanying the more common necrotic type of cell kill. Furthermore, the light
ions also have an increased induction of senescence, that is, permanent cell cycle arrest, as seen in Figure 4. Senescence is therefore
probably the most desirable endpoint of all cancer therapies, as the tumor cells can then lose their reproductive ability and slowly
disappear depending on the remaining cellular half-life of ≈2.5 y. As seen in Figure 31, the chordoma treated was reduced to half its size
or 10% to 15% of the initial volume six years after the treatment [49, 95, 97-99]. Because more ions per unit dose and cell kill are needed
at medium to low ionization densities, more effective apoptotic and senescent responses are obtained at ionization densities of 20 eV/
nm to 40 eV/nm, as shown theoretically and experimentally [1, 2, 7, 39]. Interestingly, helium, lithium and beryllium combine a high
local apoptotic and senescent tumor cell inactivation only a few mm around their Bragg peaks and can thus be regarded as the ultimate
stereotactic, conformal and even molecular radiation therapy modalities [6, 49, 55, 87].




35                                                                                                                         Volume 09; Issue 01
Ann Case Rep, an open access journal
ISSN: 2574-7754
Citation: Brahme A (2024) New Radiation Oncology Optimization Principles Based On In-Vivo Predictive Assay and Recent Develop-
ments in Molecular Radiation Biology. Ann Case Report 09: 1625. DOI: 10.29011/2574-7754.101625




Figure 30: A quality modulated or quasiuniform absorbed dose and cell kill distribution can be generated by combining lithium and
boron or carbon ions in suitable ratios. The small local fluctuations in absorbed dose are due to a somewhat large longitudinal range
modulation (∼3 mm) used to clearly illustrate the applied mechanism combining lithium and boron or carbon ion Bragg peaks at each
depth interval. The different panels show the total absorbed dose and the boron or carbon doses and the lithium dose in the upper row and
lower left, whereas the cell survival and mean LET distribution are shown on the lower right. Interestingly, by combining lithium and
boron or carbon, a uniform biological effect, survival, and absorbed dose can be obtained both for uniform tumors and with an optimal
biological effect modulation for heterogeneous tumors [36, 48, 60, 76-78].
       Optimal cancer cell inactivation would benefit substantially by a treatment modality that preferentially induces senescence,
probably the most cost-efficient treatment to stop further cell cycling and block tumor growth. Actually, this is probably also the mildest
but still efficient end point to cure a cancer [2, 6, 41-44, 100, 101], as it can make the clonogenic tumor cells lose their uncontrolled
cell cycling ability, as seen in Figure 4. The induction of autophagy (self-digestion) and apoptosis (programmed cell death Figure 4)
may follow more severe DNA damage to minimize cancer induction with more complex DNA damage and increased risk for severe
mutations, e.g., with turned-on oncogenes or lost suppressor genes. Lithium ions are probably the optimal ion, at least for smaller
tumors (see Figures 4 and 29, [2]: Figure 3, [1, 3, 6, 95]) and pediatric patients. The major advantage of molecular radiation therapy
with lithium ions is the low-ionization density in all normal tissues, largely inducing fast DNA repair while often inducing apoptosis and
senescence only in the tumor volume. For the same reasons, medium- sized tumors are probably best treated using boron ions, but this
may sometimes require an extra beam portal compared to carbon ions, especially for larger hypoxic tumors.




36                                                                                                                         Volume 09; Issue 01
Ann Case Rep, an open access journal
ISSN: 2574-7754
Citation: Brahme A (2024) New Radiation Oncology Optimization Principles Based On In-Vivo Predictive Assay and Recent Develop-
ments in Molecular Radiation Biology. Ann Case Report 09: 1625. DOI: 10.29011/2574-7754.101625




Figure 31: The dose delivery for a large pelvic chordoma as shown in the upper and lower left treatment plans. The lower right plain
MR images show the gradual disappearance of the chordoma six years after the treatment, probably due to a massive senescent response
without traces of tumor growth. This treatment was made with carbon ions but could most likely with advantage be done with boron ions
as seen by the B and C ion LET data and apoptosis in Figures 5, 29, 33! (Courtesy: Hirohiko Tsujii, NIRS, Chiba, Japan).
Secondary Cancer Risks
       The new power of being able to approximately quantify apoptosis makes it possible to better estimate the probability of inducing
a secondary cancer especially with experimental cell survival and apoptosis data as shown in Figure 32 (cf [2]: Figures 7 and 9). It is
unlikely that the apoptotic fraction will contribute to secondary cancer induction (except possibly in TP53 mutant cell lines that may
integrate fragments from apoptotic bodies into their genomes!), so it is useful that this fraction can be estimated using the new RHR
formula and removed from other forms of misrepair to more accurately describe the cells that are potentially capable of generating
a secondary cancer. This cell fraction, as shown in Figure 32, has its secondary cancer induction peak in the 3 GyE/Fr region, so in
radiation therapy optimization, it is truly desirable to minimize this volume in normal tissues as much as possible. Figure 32 also shows
that the maximal risk is the smallest for low-LET ions (blue-shaded), largely due to their high apoptotic fraction induction. The real
secondary cancer risk may be on the order of 5% of the maximal values in Figure 32 or less. Obviously, these experimental data are not
truly relevant for all surrounding normal tissues that may receive a fair dose and are at risk for secondary cancer. However, the present
tumor cell line is at least wt TP53 so probably not the most extremely mutated one and may, in a first approximation, be assumed to be
representative both for normal and tumor tissue risks. Furthermore, the dose axis is clearly the dose per fraction, so it means that the
total dose is increased by the number of fractions used. Interestingly, the plot is drawn as a function of dose equivalent (dose x RBE;
the 50% survival RBEs used are given in the figure), so all the maximal doses align very well, indicating that the ion with the lowest
LET and highest apoptosis will always minimize the secondary cancer risk for a given delivered dose equivalent. In fact, just as nature
arranged it with the LDA to avoid cancer before full repair is induced (cf Figure 4) but this time HAD is mainly involved [1]. Notably, this
secondary cancer risk is a contraindication for large, low-dose volumes with many beam portals in intensity-modulated photon therapy
using methods such as “rapid arc”, “volumetric arc”, and “tomotherapy” on nonseniors, which may have time to develop secondary
cancer after 15-20 years [8, 56, 102, 103]. Interestingly, the new fractionation procedure proposed above (sec 5.3) and the new treatment
approach suggested in Figure 6 will allow fewer beam portals and higher tumor doses with fewer adverse reactions in normal tissues


37                                                                                                                         Volume 09; Issue 01
Ann Case Rep, an open access journal
ISSN: 2574-7754
Citation: Brahme A (2024) New Radiation Oncology Optimization Principles Based On In-Vivo Predictive Assay and Recent Develop-
ments in Molecular Radiation Biology. Ann Case Report 09: 1625. DOI: 10.29011/2574-7754.101625



using ordinary fixed beam delivery.




Figure 32: The lower shaded bel-shaped regions show the maximal secondary cancer induction probability as a function of the LET
and dose equivalent per fraction delivered to tissue. At low doses, the risk of inducing a mutation is small, whereas at high doses, the
probability of generating a mutation is higher, but so is the probability of also eliminating it via the treatment. The risk is highest around
≈3 GyE/Fr, so this volume in the patients´ normal tissues should truly be minimized. The LDA and LDHS of this TP53 intact cell line are
clear from the curve shape for the two lowest LET beams (60Co and 40 eV/nm) as they are practically coinciding at low dose equivalents
(black and violet curves). Interestingly, the risk is the smallest for the lowest-LET boron ions due to their high LDA and HDA. The
upper shaded area is due to nonapoptotic misrepair for 40 eV/nm 10B ions as also shown by the red nonapoptotic misrepair curves. All
data points are experimental and the RHR formula is used with the CDN1: one-dimensional closest distance norm, for the fit to data (not
least square; for details: [1]).
       In fact, if minimal risk for secondary cancer is also a goal of the treatment, multiportal molecular radiation therapy with lithium
ions (cf Figure 4) with half a GyE plateau dose/portal would be ideal, as seen in Figure 32. With the lightest ions, this is generally a
smaller problem, as fewer beam portals are needed, and it should thus be the treatment of choice for nonseniors that hopefully will
recover from a well optimized local treatment with minimal risk of late morbidity!
Adjuvant Treatments
      As seen in Figures 4 - 7 above, most tumors are linked to a low-dose radiation-resistant phenotype (LDRR) due to a mutant TP53
gene and thus a reduced probability of inducing LDA, HDA and LDHS.




38                                                                                                                           Volume 09; Issue 01
Ann Case Rep, an open access journal
ISSN: 2574-7754
Citation: Brahme A (2024) New Radiation Oncology Optimization Principles Based On In-Vivo Predictive Assay and Recent Develop-
ments in Molecular Radiation Biology. Ann Case Report 09: 1625. DOI: 10.29011/2574-7754.101625




Figure 33: Experimental demonstration of the increased LDA and HDA by mutant TP53 reactivation by using the new RHR cell
survival formulation. The change in U1690 SCLC cell survival (with a mutant TP53 gene), S(D), and major DNA repair processes
induced with PRIMA-1 (solid lines) and without (dotted lines), irradiated using 60Co γ-rays. Arrows indicate the change after adding 5
&M PRIMA-1 for 14 h (10 h before to 4 h postirradiation). Even if the absolute apoptotic survival change is small, ≈ 7% at low doses
(LDA) and up to 15% at high doses (HDA), there are larger estimated changes in the reparability of radiation damage with PRIMA-1
added, as seen in the HR-only repair (fh ≈+50 %) and the HR repair of NHEJ misrepair (l≈+100 %) and sum of all repair terms that
even compensate somewhat for the increased apoptosis via reactivation of mutant p53. Interestingly, the low dose relative increase in
apoptosis was more than 10 fold below 0.15 Gy (LDA, see the text and [1]). The shaded low-dose area between the calculated apoptotic
cell survival and measured clonogenic survival is due to apoptotic loss before the full activation of p53 at serine 15 and 20 via the
checkpoint kinases ATM and CHK2 (cf. Figure 4 and [1-3]). The high-dose loss in cell survival is most likely due to PRIMA- 1-induced
augmented toxicity through the increasing associated ROS production (PRIMA-1 inhibits the enzyme thioredoxin reductase 1/Trx1 and
thioredoxin and decreases cellular glutathione/GSH levels) and increasing HDA and senescence [36, 48, 60, 76-78]. The mean error!
and standard deviation σ of the data points from the fit are also shown: all below ≈1%, but are obviously much higher in some of the
individual subcomponents (≈10%). The volume of data that can be estimated using the new, more flexible, and probably more accurate
cell survival and DNA repair formulation is striking. Updated from ([2]: Fig 6) with LDA and HDA and the effects of ROS. CDN1:
one-dimensional closest distance norm (not least square, see [1]). The new RHR formulation significantly helped the interpretation of
the wide range of effects of PRIMA-1 (f, g, k, l are repair fractions in which HR fixes various NHEJ misrepair and damage, as indirectly
explained in this figure, fh plain HR, and fn plain NHEJ; see [1, 104, 105] for further details).
       Interestingly, the cell survival effects of the mutant p53-reactivating active component MQ of the compounds PRIMA-1 and
APR246 on the TP53 mutant SCLC cell line U1690 after exposure to 60Co γ-rays is shown in detail in Figure 33. The curves with PRIMA-1
are shown here as solid lines, and the plain SCLC cell line U1690 without PRIMA-1 is shown as doted lines, with arrows indicating the
change in survival by the presence of PRIMA-1 during irradiation. At higher doses, the relative survival loss is quite large (almost 27%
at 4 Gy, see Figure 33). From this point of view there would be a clinical advantage of using high doses per fraction with PRIMA-1.
There is an increased HR repair alone (f by almost 50%) but also indications of an increased HR repair fixing NHEJ misrepair (l is more
than doubled), indicating that the HR pathway is largely improved through p53 reactivation, partly increasing the very low- and high-
dose apoptosis [1, 2]. The recovery of the HR pathway with PRIMA- 1 related apoptosis is increased more than tenfold below 0.15 Gy,

39                                                                                                                      Volume 09; Issue 01
Ann Case Rep, an open access journal
ISSN: 2574-7754
Citation: Brahme A (2024) New Radiation Oncology Optimization Principles Based On In-Vivo Predictive Assay and Recent Develop-
ments in Molecular Radiation Biology. Ann Case Report 09: 1625. DOI: 10.29011/2574-7754.101625



sixfold at ½ Gy (LDA), fourfold at 1 Gy, and more than doubled             Optimal Dose Delivery Techniques
at high doses (HDA). Due to the wide therapeutic effect spectrum
                                                                                  During the last 125 years of curative radiation therapy, the
of the active component MQ of APR 246 and PRIMA-1 [1, 2, 4,
                                                                           treatment and diagnostic equipment and associated irradiation
104-109], both on reactive oxygen species (ROS), inhibiting the
                                                                           techniques have changed considerably, as seen in Figure 34,
enzyme thioredoxin reductase 1 and thioredoxin and decreasing
                                                                           summarizing some of the last 50 years of development. Intensity
cellular glutathione levels and increasing apoptosis. It is difficult to
                                                                           modulation started quite early with absorbers and wedge filters
say exactly what caused the increase in HDA apoptosis by ≈15% in
                                                                           in the beams, but it was not until much more flexible techniques,
the current study. Even if PRIMA-1 increased the HR only, and its
                                                                           such as computer-controlled high-resolution multileaf collimation
repair of NHEJ misrepair, this probably occurred due to improved
                                                                           and scanning beams really, took off, thanks to the new equipment
HR initiation via TP53, but there are also indications that apoptosis
                                                                           and treatment planning systems capable of inverse physical dose-
could be caused by direct mitochondrial effects via caspase-3,
                                                                           and even radiation biologically optimized treatments. This was all
and the cell cycle block via p21 is not generally restored either
                                                                           important to achieve significant improvements in complication-
[104, 105]. This latter fact may even be a therapeutic advantage
                                                                           free cure of ≈ 25% and more. Today, a large number of treatments
for cancer treatments as the tumor cells will continue cycling and
                                                                           are performed using intensity-modulated beams, making
incorporate damaged DNA in their genomes without repair, and
                                                                           optimized beam portal selection quite different to maintain the
they may finally end up in a mitotic catastrophe situation, as in
                                                                           highest possible flexibility in intensity modulation. Thus, parallel
classical radiation therapy. The first very interesting cell culture
                                                                           opposed beams are not ideal, as the modulation flexibility of the
study using APR 246 on colorectal cancer combined with radiation
                                                                           second beam is practically lost, as shown in Figures 34 and 35.
was recently published, and mut TP53 cell line showed almost wt
                                                                           The same is true twice for the classical four-field box technique,
TP53 response with 5 &M APR 246, whereas TP53 Null cells were
                                                                           even though it gives an elevated uniform dose to the tumor with
only half as responsive [109], generally consistent with Figure 33.
                                                                           low-energy severely attenuated beams such as 60Co! Three field-
At 7.5 μM, the mut cell line was even more responsive than the wt,
                                                                           symmetric or orthogonal beams are almost as good or even better,
which should be a valuable treatment property. In a tumor growth
                                                                           and the four-field tetrahedral configuration is truly the best, mainly
assay, 20 μM APR 246 and 6 Gy both halved the mut xenograft
                                                                           as it separates the entrance and exit portals as far as possible from
size, whereas the combination brought it down to ≈1/5, but wt cells
                                                                           each other. However, we should avoid going to higher numbers
showed only a 30% APR 246 reduction, and null and mut cells were
                                                                           as the overlapping beams and the almost complete irradiation
similar [37]. Interestingly, Venn diagrams of significantly enriched
                                                                           of the whole patient cross-section to low doses will increase the
pathways and genes for combined and radiation-alone treatments
                                                                           secondary cancer induction probability (cf Figure 32), especially
were also included for wt, mut, and TP53 null cells [110]. APR 246
                                                                           for patients with long life expectancy [2, 102, 103]!
and PRIMA-1 are therefore very interesting compounds to improve
the treatment possibilities of the multitude of LDRR tumors (cf                  Interestingly, the new understanding that most normal
the U1690 SCLC cell survival in Figure 33) that have a mutant              tissues with an intact TP53 gene are LDHS as discussed above
TP53 pathway (>50% of all tumors) and therefore otherwise may              (cf Figures 4-7, [2]). This means that the tumor dose per fraction
need ion therapy to counteract their LDRR phenotype property as            should no longer be 2 Gy, since this is in the region where tumor
the treatment response is then generally more independent of the           and normal tissues are almost equally sensitive (cf Figure 6). It is
p53 status. Interestingly, the recovered LDA, LDHS and loss of             then better to truly use the fractionation window advantage and
LDRR opens up the possibility for improved radiation therapy at            use the induced radiation resistance induced by the first ½ Gy and
low doses, and the regained HDA, senescence and ROS effects                continue to 1.8-2.3 Gy where after HDA sets in. This means that
make high doses per fraction treatments even more beneficial, as           the tumor dose per fraction will be ≈2.3-3+ Gy, which is good,
seen in the figure, especially if the compound is injected directly        especially for the slowly responding tumors, as shown in Figure
into the tumor (cf [1]: Figure 17 for potential treatment effects)!        6. Assuming that the tumor is mutant on TP53, as most tumors
A recent experimental study also showed synergistic effects of             are, we can then use the classical LQ model (otherwise we need
APR 246 with higher LET radiation (Radium-224 alpha particles)             the 3rd or 4th formulation in Figure 7 such as for the melanoma
not surprisingly making it an interesting adjuvant also for modern         in Figure 32).
light ion radiation therapy even if the ROS effect may be reduced
                                                                           To ensure that we do not overtreat the lung tumor in Figure 12
somewhat compared to that of low LET radiation [111].
                                                                           planned for the equivalent total dose in 2 Gy per fraction of ≈ 86
                                                                           Gy, we obtain from the LQ model [112]:




40                                                                                                                              Volume 09; Issue 01
Ann Case Rep, an open access journal
ISSN: 2574-7754
Citation: Brahme A (2024) New Radiation Oncology Optimization Principles Based On In-Vivo Predictive Assay and Recent Develop-
ments in Molecular Radiation Biology. Ann Case Report 09: 1625. DOI: 10.29011/2574-7754.101625




D2 = n* d          											                                                                                    (2)
where d is the tumor dose per fraction, n is the number of fractions at a total tumor dose D= n * d and Dt
≈ 86 Gy is the total tumor dose at 2 Gy/Fr.
This is a quadratic equation in the tumor dose per fraction with the simple solution:

D=                                                 .						                                                        (3)




Figure 34: Eight steps in the development of external beam radiation therapy. The right column shows a number of new imaging
techniques, some of which, such as PET-CT imaging, may significantly improve the outcome of radiation therapy, particularly when
used in biologically optimized approaches. The approximate change in complication-free cure (DP+) in each step compared to the first
panel of standard radiation therapy planning.
       Let us apply it on the lower treatment plan of Figure 12 above, where Dt is ≈ 86 Gy and the risk organ dose is ≈ 60 Gy; with
n=20 or 4 weeks of 5 fractions, and α/β ≈ 3 for lung cancer, the risk organ dose per fraction Dr=D60/86=2.35 Gy; Slightly high for the
therapeutic fractionation window 1.8-2.3 Gy, so with 21 or 22 fractions, we obtain 2.28 or 2.21 Gy/Fr. The corresponding risk organ
doses are 47.1, 47.9 and 48.6 Gy, which is a substantial reduction from 60 Gy in the conventional plan, and the tumor dose is reduced to
≈68 Gy. In fact, we should preferably select a fraction number to end the treatment after a last weekend (cf. Figure 20).




41                                                                                                                      Volume 09; Issue 01
Ann Case Rep, an open access journal
ISSN: 2574-7754
Citation: Brahme A (2024) New Radiation Oncology Optimization Principles Based On In-Vivo Predictive Assay and Recent Develop-
ments in Molecular Radiation Biology. Ann Case Report 09: 1625. DOI: 10.29011/2574-7754.101625



Thus, most people still using the old usual 2 Gy/Fr to the tumor with IMRT dose delivery hurts patients more than necessary by too high
total doses! Interestingly, this is in line with recent discussions on “hypofractionation” in the head and neck region [113-115] but also
for more general tumor locations [116-119]. In fact, the classical 2 Gy/Fr fractionation window was established in the era of parallel
opposed beam therapy when the tumor and normal tissues had almost the same doses (cf Figures 34, 35), and it was largely the normal
tissue reactions at 2 Gy/Fr that limited the dose delivery. Thus, the presently defined daily and weekly fractionation windows (cf Figures
7, 19, 20, [2]) are still the same, but in the era of IMRT, when we can substantially increase the dose delivery to the tumor, we should
still keep the 2 Gy/Fr limit in the normal tissues at risk because this is where since some 70 years know, the optimal tolerance window
is located.




Figure 35: Comparison of classical coplanar and more general noncoplanar treatment techniques. The symmetric planar configurations
allow, in most cases, a fairly uniform dose to the tumor but also to normal tissues. Noncoplanar techniques are more advantageous with
regard to the dose to normal tissues, especially when combined with intensity modulated radiation treatments (IMRT). Thus, for the few
field techniques (≤3) to be effective, it is essential to use nonuniform dose delivery. The optimal angle between two neighboring fields
is often then optimal near 120° to maximize the effect on the tumor and minimize beam interactions in normal tissues with parallel
opposed beams. The approximate resultant complication-free cure (P+) is indicated in each case for a uniform spherical target volume
in a larger spherical patient.
       It is thus a question of tumor dose escalation rather than hypofractionation, which happens to be one of its consequences, largely
since the clinical meaning of the fractionation window may not have been fully understood [38, 49]. Additionally, today we also know
why it is at 2 Gy: Most normal tissue are LDHS and LDA and after the low dose initiation (≈½ Gy) of full DNA repair we should use
this acquired repair advantage to its full extent in normal tissues up to about two ≈2.3 Gy where the HDA sets in as described in Figures
4-7 [1, 2, 37]. It is a bit sad that the powerful tool of biologically optimized IMRT has been somewhat misused clinically for some 20
years and the classical 2 Gy/Fr has been over conservatively kept unchanged for the tumor as in the “good old days”! Some of the first
discussions of the optimal dose per fraction in view of LDHS were at the end of last millennium, as seen in Figure 19 ([56]: Figure 4,
[120]: Figure 4). Of course, we still have had some benefit of an improved dose delivery and saved patients. However, for the extra ≈12
Gy unnecessarily delivered to the patients, as seen above, may have induced some secondary cancers, the number of which can easily be
estimated. For the future, it is important to know that the presently proposed 1.8-2.3 Gy fractionation window [1, 2, 34, 38, 56] is derived
for Lung epithelial cells and other normal tissues may have somewhat different values but the underlying molecular mechanism should

42                                                                                                                          Volume 09; Issue 01
Ann Case Rep, an open access journal
ISSN: 2574-7754
Citation: Brahme A (2024) New Radiation Oncology Optimization Principles Based On In-Vivo Predictive Assay and Recent Develop-
ments in Molecular Radiation Biology. Ann Case Report 09: 1625. DOI: 10.29011/2574-7754.101625



essentially be the same as given by the mechanisms in Figure 4! It is fascinating that first, after 125 years of curative radiation therapy,
we start to understand how the molecular mechanism behind an intact TP53 gene makes 2 Gy/Fr so useful in the clinic, and when it is
commonly mutated in the tumor, we may need biologically optimized IMRT, light ions and TP53 reactivation.
      Thus, independent of which treatment technique in Figure 35 you might be using, the new radiation biology considerations
of Figures 4 and 6 will substantially improve the complication-free cure in the clinic, and the beam configurations in Figure 35 are
often most efficient [2]. This discussion was focused on traditional photon therapy where there is a substantial fractionation window,
as described in Figures 4-7 and [2]. As discussed above, this window is also fully open with helium and lithium ions but then slowly
closes toward carbon ions and neutrons, and there is still a weak but useful effect with boron ions, as seen in Figure 32. Furthermore,
these lightest ions simultaneously have the advantage of a lower microdosimetric heterogeneity, making the dose response steeper, the
complication-free cure higher and the switch to a low LET round up less important.
       For larger bulkier hypoxic tumors, lithium may not be sufficiently effective, and boron might be more optimal with a small
fractionation window, making the low LET round-up more important. In fact, even neon, oxygen and carbon ions and neutrons can have
increased usefulness with extended (≈20 GyE) low LET round-ups, possibly with concomitant high LET boosts off the gross tumor
for the largest hypoxic tumors. The continued development of complex hybrid equipment, for example, combining CT and MR with
radiation therapy units, may be useful for a small subgroup of patients, but the compromises in performance quality and cost make them
suboptimal in the long run. It is probably more therapeutically and cost efficient to improve the molecular tumor imaging capability,
as discussed above, and use more efficient automatic docking systems (cf Figure 36a and [6]: Figure 8, [15]). This would allow almost
perfect synchronization of all data sets whether using CT, MR or PET for dose delivery and biological responsiveness imaging (Figures
10, and 36 a, b). With advanced imaging equipment, it would generally be much less cost efficient if two or more very expensive units
were totally integrated.




Figure 36a: To improve cost effectiveness it is better to combine multiple diagnostic and therapeutic units, all with accurate optical
Auto Set Up units, than to build together suboptimal units so that they block each other’s imaging ability. With robotic Auto Set Up, all
imaging and therapeutic units can be combined in any desired order with optimal performance of each unit, making no compromises
using MR-CT-PET-RT or Ion Therapy, for example [6, 17].




43                                                                                                                         Volume 09; Issue 01
Ann Case Rep, an open access journal
ISSN: 2574-7754
Citation: Brahme A (2024) New Radiation Oncology Optimization Principles Based On In-Vivo Predictive Assay and Recent Develop-
ments in Molecular Radiation Biology. Ann Case Report 09: 1625. DOI: 10.29011/2574-7754.101625




Figure 36b: With a robotic auto set-up, all imaging and therapeutic units can be combined in any desired order with optimal performance,
and the projection camera can potentially be used as an augmented reality feature, as shown here. The back back-projection of the tumor
and its internal target volume [83] on the patient skin surface (pale white) in real time on the breathing patient could be used to control
that the tumor stays inside the conventional light filed projection (pale yellow) of the therapeutic beam aperture over several breathing
cycles. Interestingly, both the PET-CT, MRSI or Treatment plan Internal Target Volume could be projected sequentially if all data sets
where 4D and so could the multileaf collimator setting were checked against the light field of the treatment unit during the normal
breathing motions of the patient!
      Often, they may not work simultaneously, and one unit may be prohibited from use when the other is working. Furthermore, we
may need more than two data sets for many situations. What one may save is the setup of the patient at two different units, but with, e.g.,
projection camera Auto Set Up (Figure 36a, [6]: Figure 8, [15]), this is a minor problem, and there are still motion artifacts between the
two diagnostic modalities even if the initial positioning is correct. This also makes it possible to combine any diagnostic and therapeutic
units with mm accuracy allowing all possible combinations, as shown in Figure 36a, and for the BIOART approach discussed in Figure
10. This makes sense not only for the largest equipment types such as Ion therapy [6] high Tesla MRSI units, Figure 3a and whole body
PET-CT-PC (Figure 3b [6]).




44                                                                                                                         Volume 09; Issue 01
Ann Case Rep, an open access journal
ISSN: 2574-7754
Citation: Brahme A (2024) New Radiation Oncology Optimization Principles Based On In-Vivo Predictive Assay and Recent Develop-
ments in Molecular Radiation Biology. Ann Case Report 09: 1625. DOI: 10.29011/2574-7754.101625




Figure 37: Improvement in biochemical relapse-free control of prostate cancer by switching from conformal and IMRT photon therapy
to protons and carbon ions is shown. For the largest, more complex tumors (PSA >20), more than a doubling is seen with photon
IMRT (and protons) and more than a fourfold increase with carbon ions compared to 3D conformal treatments used in the early 1990s
(21−>89%). Interestingly, by using biologically optimized radiation therapy and the BIOART procedure, almost as good a result may
be reached, especially if the hypoxia is gone or can be handled ([121] cf. Figures 10-12). An OER of ≈2 would reduce the effective dose
for low LET in the tumor ≈50% for each beam, as seen in the lower left.
To give an example of the development in clinical performance, the improvement in biochemical relapse-free control of prostate cancer
going from 3D conformal to IMRT, proton and carbon ions is shown in Figure 37.
       It is quite impressive that we now reached ≈ 90% probability of no evidence of disease at 5 years after treatment with carbon ions,
not surprisingly indicating a fair amount of hypoxia in these higher PSA tumors when compared with low LET treatments. Early IMRT
also like protons more than doubled the cure of 3D conformal treatments as both suffer of a low LET whereas carbon ions is introducing
a second doubling compared to protons! This is a tumor site where lithium molecular radiation therapy would do as well as carbon and
with reduced adverse normal tissue reactions even if they are few today, as seen in Figure 38, where a larger data set of tumor cure
and absence of normal tissue complications are given for 11 tumor sites. It is interesting to see in this two dimensional diagram how
conformal photons and electrons form a light blue area, to low LET IMRT a beige shaded area next to the green upper right corner of
high complication free cure with carbon ions.




45                                                                                                                        Volume 09; Issue 01
Ann Case Rep, an open access journal
ISSN: 2574-7754
Citation: Brahme A (2024) New Radiation Oncology Optimization Principles Based On In-Vivo Predictive Assay and Recent Develop-
ments in Molecular Radiation Biology. Ann Case Report 09: 1625. DOI: 10.29011/2574-7754.101625




Figure 38: A more detailed view of how the complications are reduced and the recurrences are diminishing as we switch from
conventional conformal photon therapy to IMRT photons and protons and carbon ions is shown. Interestingly, IMRT photons (blue)
and protons (brown) again do almost equally well, with carbon ion therapy (green) stickling out as the almost perfect modality having
only a few percent complications and recurrences in most cases. Clearly, even if the data are mainly nonrandomized, they give a similar
indication of the merits of light ions as in Figure 37, where the low PSA data are also included in more detail. In theory, with statistically
independent tumor and normal tissue responses, the complication-free cure is given by: P+ = PB ∗ (1 − PI). However, with commonly
clinically correlated responses, one would expect P+ ≈ PB − PI as given by the iso-lines (cf. Eq (1), [59]). Both expressions are focused
on the upper right green corner of the diagram maximizing the complication-free cure (modified from the Mayo Clinic).
Conclusions
       The present paper discusses a large number of new ways to optimize radiation therapy. Perhaps most important is that we need to
reconsider the classical 2 Gy/Fr mean tumor dose range for low-LET radiation based on recent clinical observations and the molecular
indications that most normal tissues really are low-dose hypersensitive. To minimize damage to normal tissues at risk, a maximum
dose of 2.3 Gy/Fr or less implies optimal tolerance of normal tissues and allows a significant tumor boost and approximately a 10 Gy
total dose reduction [2]. Full NHEJ and HR repair activity is induced after 0.5 Gy, and thus with ≈ 1.5 Gy delivered with fully effective
NHEJ and HR repair and almost full NHEJ recovery before the next day’s treatment fraction (cf inset in Figure 20). Furthermore, it
means avoidance of the more severe high-dose apoptosis that sets in after 2- 3 GyE (Figure 4). To truly introduce a major paradigm
shift in curative radiation therapy thinking, the time dose fractionation should be optimized for substantial weekend HR repair recovery
(and simultaneously complete NHEJ recovery) in normal tissues by higher doses Friday evening and Monday morning and midday
Wednesday. Interestingly, the valuable daily and weekly fractionation window at 1.8-2.3 Gy/Fr also works for our lightest ions
≈helium-boron largely with low LET in normal tissues and can deliver a further therapeutic boost to hypoxic tumors. Unfortunately,
the fractionation window is practically closed from carbon and heavier ions since the increased biological effect in the tumor spills over
to normal tissues, as almost proven with neon ions and neutrons, as seen in Figures 18 and 27. In addition, people are still working on
introducing oxygen ions just because they are unhappy about the way carbon ions work, even if they have not understood their optimal
usefulness is with a low LET treatment round up, because they are already on the too high LET side using carbon. The lightest ions are
also the way to minimize the risk for secondary cancers and reduce ion attenuation and fragmentation and neutron tails, e.g., for pediatric


46                                                                                                                           Volume 09; Issue 01
Ann Case Rep, an open access journal
ISSN: 2574-7754
Citation: Brahme A (2024) New Radiation Oncology Optimization Principles Based On In-Vivo Predictive Assay and Recent Develop-
ments in Molecular Radiation Biology. Ann Case Report 09: 1625. DOI: 10.29011/2574-7754.101625



patients, at the same time, their low microscopic heterogeneity is                   Belkic D. and Brahme A. eds. Comprehensive Biomedical Physics.
low with a steep dose response and higher complication-free cure                     Elsevier, Amsterdam, Netherlands, Vol 3 p: 331-345.
and keeping the fractionation window fully open. The potential                  10. Boulant N, Quettier L (2023) Iseult Consortium. Commissioning of the
improvements in molecular tumor diagnostics may significantly                       Iseult CEA 11.7 T whole-body MRI: current status, gradient- magnet
                                                                                    interaction tests and first imaging experience. Magnetic Resonance
improve the early accurate diagnostics of tumors as well as their                   Materials in Physics, Biology and Medicine. 36: 175-189.
effective elimination by the mildest and most curative treatment
modalities using nature’s own preferred pathways for programmed                 11. Wu J. Wu K. Xu A. Shi Y. Wu Y. Wu J. Qin H. Liu J. Mechanical
                                                                                    Structure Design of a 14T Body-Size MRI Magnet. IEEE International
cell death and senescence induction in the tumor (cf Figures 4 and                  Conference on Applied Superconductivity and Electromagnetic
31). Taking the many approaches discussed above into account,                       Devices (ASEMD) 16-18 Oct 2020 Tianjin, China.
the resultant increase in complication-free cure is likely to achieve           12. Belkic D (2001) Fast Padè Transform (FPT) for magnetic resonance
improvements by as much as 30% and more for many tumor                              imaging and computerized tomography. Nuc Inst Meth Phys Res A.
sites, e.g., using APR-246 for problematic TP53-mutant tumors                       471: 165-169.
(Figure 33). Almost half this improvement alone was estimated                   13. Budinger TF, Bird MD (2018) MRI and MRS of the human brain
to result from the improved fractionation schedule, as shown in                     at magnetic fields of 14T to 20T: technical feasibility, safety, and
Figures 19 and 20. Thus, we urgently need to open the door for                      neuroscience horizons. Neuroimage. 168: 509-531.
these new possibilities and switch from carbon to boron and from                14. Ugurbil K. (2018) Imaging at ultrahigh magnetic fields: history,
protons to lithium ions allowing apoptotic- senescent Bragg peak                    challenges, and solutions. Neuroimage. 168: 7-32.
molecular radiation therapy (cf Figure 4)! Potential total dose                 15. Brahme A (2010) Design of an Open PET System with Therapeutic
reductions of 5-15 Gy are possible with the most recent advanced                    & Stereoscopic Phase-Contrast X-ray Capabilities. Proceedings of
low LET- IMRT approaches using the daily and weekly optimal                         Japanese- European Joint Symposium on Ion Cancer Therapy and
dose fractionation window (Figure 20). Analogously 5- 15 GyE                        NIRS-KI Joint Symposium on Ion-Radiation Sciences, Stockholm.
ion therapy total dose equivalent tumor boosts are possible with                16. Yamaya T, Inaniwa T, Minohara S, Yoshida E, Inadama N, et al. (2011)
a low-LET treatment round- up with carbon ions and higher LET                       Development of a small prototype for a proof-of-concept of OpenPET
                                                                                    imaging. Phys Med Biol. 56: 1123-1137.
ions (Figure 15) or even preferably simply using lithium - boron
ions with mainly a low LET in normal tissues at risk (Figures 27,               17. Brahme A, Nyman P, Skatt B (2008) 4D laser camera for accurate
28) keeping the effective normal tissue fractionation window open.                  patient positioning, collision avoidance, image fusion and adaptive
                                                                                    approaches during diagnostic and therapeutic procedures. Med Phys
                                                                                    35: 1670-1681.
References
                                                                                18. Cherry SR, Jones T, Karp JS, Qi J, Moses WW, et al. (2017) Total-
1.   Brahme A (2022) Quantifying Cellular Repair, Misrepair and Apoptosis           Body PET: Maximizing Sensitivity to Create New Opportunities for
     Induced by Boron Ions, Gamma Rays and PRIMA-1 Using the RHR                    Clinical Research and Patient Care.J Nuc Med 59: 1-11.
     Formulation. Radiat Res 198: 271-296.
                                                                                19. Buscemi G, Perego P, Carenini N, Nakanishi M, Chessa L, et al.
2.   Brahme A (2023) TP53 and the Ultimate Biological Optimization Steps            (2004) Activation of ATM and Chk2 kinases in relation to the amount of
     of Curative Radiation Oncology. Cancers 15: 4286.                              DNA strand breaks. Oncogene 23: 7691-7700.
3.   Brahme A (2020) A DNA Repair-based model of cell survival with             20. Enns L, Bogen KT, Wizniak J, Murtha AD, Weinfeld M (2004) Low-
     important clinical consequences. Radiat Res 194: 202-235.                      dose radiation hypersensitivity is associated with p53-dependent
4.   Brahme, A (2016) High resolution molecular radiation therapy and               apoptosis. Mol Cancer Res. 2: 557-566.
     tumor imaging for the 21st century. J. Nucl. Med. Radiat. Ther 7: 1- 11.   21. Short SC, Bourne S, Martindale C, Woodcock M, Jackson SP (2005)
5.   Brahme A, Löf J (2014) Fundamentals of Physically and Biologically             DNA Damage Responses at Low Radiation Doses. Radiat. Res. 164:
     Based Radiation Therapy Optimization In: Brahme A. ed. in chief                292-302.
     Comprehensive BioMedical Physics Vol 9 Ch 12 p 271- 313, Major             22. Brahme A, Rydberg B, Blomqvist P (1997) Dual spatially correlated
     Reference Work, Elsevier Oxford.                                               nucleosomal double strand breaks in cell inactivation. In Microdosimetry:
6.   Brahme A (2014) editor Biologically optimized radiation therapy. World         An Interdisciplinary Approach; Goodhead, D.T., O’Neill, P., Menzel,
     Scientific Publishing, Singapore p 1-667.                                      H.G., Eds.; The Royal Society of Chemistry: Cambridge, UK 125-128.

7.   Brahme A (2023) Physical, Biological and Clinical Merits of High Energy    23. Brahme A, Lorat Y (2023) Dual Nucleosomal Double Strand Breaks
     Boron Ions for Radiation Therapy. In Boron, Boron Compounds and                are the Key Effectors of Curative Radiation Therapy. Biophysica. 3:
     Boron-Based Materials and Structures; Aydin, M., Ed.; IntechOpen:              668-694.
     London, UK 1-23.                                                           24. Zhao M, Wang Y, Zhao Y, He S, Zhao R, et al. (2020) Caspase-3
8.   Brahme A (1982) Physical and biologic aspects on the optimum choice            knockout attenuates radiation- induced tumor repopulation via
     of radiation modality. Acta Radiol. Oncol. 21: 469-479.                        impairing the ATM/p53/Cox-2/PGE2 pathway in non-small cell lung
                                                                                    cancer. Aging. 12: 21758-21776.
9.   Prost RW (2014) Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopic Imaging. In:


47                                                                                                                                        Volume 09; Issue 01
Ann Case Rep, an open access journal
ISSN: 2574-7754
Citation: Brahme A (2024) New Radiation Oncology Optimization Principles Based On In-Vivo Predictive Assay and Recent Develop-
ments in Molecular Radiation Biology. Ann Case Report 09: 1625. DOI: 10.29011/2574-7754.101625



25. Myler L.R, Gallardo I.F, Soniat M.M, Deshpande R.A, Gonzalez X.B, et         42. Schmitt CA (2003) Senescence, apoptosis and therapy—Cutting the
    al. (2017) Single-Molecule Imaging Reveals How Mre11-Rad50-Nbs1                  lifelines of cancer. Nat. Rev. Cancer 3: 286-295.
    Initiates DNA Break Repair. Mol. Cell. 67: 891-898.
                                                                                 43. d’Adda di Fagagna F (2008) Living on a break: Cellular senescence as
26. Gerelchuluun A, Manabe E, Ishikawa T, Sun L, Itoh K, et al. (2015) The           a DNA-damage response. Nat. Rev. Cancer. 8: 512-522.
    major DNA repair pathway after both proton and carbon ion radiation
    is NHEJ, but the HR pathway is more relevant in carbon ions. Radiat.         44. Nardella C, Clohessy JG, Alimonti A, Pandolfi PP (2011) Pro-
    Res. 183: 345-356.                                                               senescence therapy for cancer treatment. Nat. Rev. Cancer: 11: 503-
                                                                                     511.
27. Takahashi A, Kubo M, Ma H, Nakagawa A, Yoshida Y, et al. (2014)
    Nonhomologous End-Joining Repair. Plays a More Important Role                45. Lind BK, Persson LM, Edgren MR, Hedlöf I, Brahme A (2003)
    than Homologous Recombination Repair. in Defining Radiosensitivity               Repairable-conditionally repairable damage model based on dual
    after Exposure to High- LET Radiation. Radiat. Res. 182: 338-344.                Poisson processes. Radiat. Res 160: 366-375.

28. Scully R, Panday A, Elango R, Willis NA (2019) DNA double-strand             46. Kappos A, Pohlit W (1972) A Cybernetic Model for Radiation Reactions
    break repair-pathway choice in somatic mammalian cells. Nat. Rev.                in Living Cells. 1 Sparsely- ionizing Radiations. Int J Rad Biol 22: 51-
    Mol. Cell Biol. 20: 698-714.                                                     65.

29. Buglewicz DJ, Buglewicz JKF, Hirakawa H, Kato TA, Liu C, et al. (2023)       47. Brahme A (2011) Accurate Description of the Cell Survival and
    The impact of DNA double-strand break repair pathways throughout                 Biological Effect at Low and High Doses and LETs. J. Rad. Res 52:
    the carbon ion spread-out Bragg peak beam. Cancer Science. 114:                  389-407.
    4548-4557.                                                                   48. Blakely EA, Chang PY (2009) Biology of charged particles. Cancer J.
30. Wang YH, Ho TLF, Hariharan A, Goh HC, Wong YL, et al. (2022) Rapid               15: 271-284.
    recruitment of p53 to DNA damage sites directs DNA repair choice and         49. Brahme A, Svensson H (2014) Physical, biological and clinical
    integrity. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 119: e2113233119.                          background for the development of biologically optimized light ion
31. Nakamura Y (2004) Isolation of p53-target genes and their functional             therapy. In Biologically optimized radiation therapy: Brahme A, ed.;
    analysis. Cancer Sci. 95: 7-11.                                                  World Scientific Publishing: Singapore. 8: 499- 648.

32. Williams AB, Schumacher B (2016) p53 in the DNA-damage-repair                50. Brahme A (2003) Biologically optimized 3-dimensional in vivo predictive
    process. Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Med. 6: a026070.                            assay based radiation therapy using positron emission tomography-
                                                                                     computerized tomography imaging. Acta Oncol. 42: 123-136.
33. Martin LM, Marples B, Lynch TH, Hollywood D, Marignol L (2014)
    Exposure to low dose ionising radiation: Molecular and clinical              51. Brahme A (2014) BIOART: Biologically Optimized 3D In Vivo Predictive
    consequences. Ca Letters 349: 98-106.                                            Assay Based Radiation Therapy. In: Brahme A, eds. Biologically
                                                                                     optimized radiation therapy. World Scientific Publishing, Singapore 7:
34. Singh B, Arrand JE, Joiner MC (1994) Hypersensitive response                     359-498.
    of normal human lung epithelial cells at low radiation doses. Int. J.
    Radiat. Biol 65: 457-464.                                                    52. Toma-Dasu I, Uhrdin J, Antonovic L, Dasu A, Nuyts S, et al. (2012)
                                                                                     Dose prescription and treatment planning based on FMISO-PET
35. Joiner MC, Johns H (1988) Renal damage in the mouse: The response                hypoxia. Acta Oncol 51: 222-230.
    to very small doses per fraction. Radiat. Res 114: 385-398.
                                                                                 53. Strååt SJ, Andreassen B, Jonsson C, Noz ME, Maguire GQ Jr, et al.
36. Turesson I, Nyman J, Qvarnström F, Simonsson M, Book M, et al.                   (2013) Clinical application of in vivo treatment delivery verification
    (2010) A low-dose hypersensitive keratinocyte loss in response                   based on PET/CT imaging of positron activity induced at high energy
    to fractionated radiotherapy is associated with growth arrest and                photon therapy Phys. Med. Biol 58: 5541.
    apoptosis. Radiot. Oncol. 94: 90-101.
                                                                                 54. Brahme A, Ågren AK (1987) On the optimal dose distribution for
37. Maeda M, Tomita M, Maeda M, Mastumoto H, Usami N, et al. (2021)                  eradication of heterogeneous tumors. Acta Oncol. 26: 377-385.
    Exposure of the cytoplasm to low-dose X-rays modifies ataxia
    telangiectasia mutated-mediated DNA damage responses. Sci Rep.               55. Brahme A (2009) Potential developments of light ion therapy: the
    11: 13113.                                                                       ultimate conformal treatment modality. First NIRS International Open
                                                                                     Laboratory Workshop, November 17, 2008, Chiba, Japan, Tsujii H
38. Riballo E, Kuhne M, Rief N, Doherty A, Smith GCM, et al. (2004) A                (ed.), Radiol Sci 52:8- 31.
    pathway of double-strand break rejoining dependent upon ATM,
    artemis, and proteins locating to γ-H2AX foci. Mol Cell. 16: 715-724.        56. Brahme A (2001) Individualizing cancer treatment: biological
                                                                                     optimization models in treatment planning and delivery. Int J Radiat
39. Brahme A (1999) Biologically based treatment planning. Acta Oncol.               Oncol Biol Phys. 49: 327- 337.
    38: 61-68.
                                                                                 57. Källman P, Ågren A, Brahme A (1992) Tumor and normal tissue
40. Xue L, Yu D, Furusawa Y, Cao J, Okayasu R, et al. (2009) ATM-                    responses to fractionated non uniform dose delivery. Int. J. Rad. Biol.
    dependent hyper-radiosensitivity in mammalian cells irradiated by                62: 249-262.
    heavy ions. Int. J. Radiat. Oncol. Biol. Phys. 75: 235-243.
                                                                                 58. Lind K, Nilsson J, Löf J, Brahme A (2001) Generalization of the
41. Vreede P, Brahme A (2009) Development of biologically optimized                  normalized dose-response gradient to non-uniform dose delivery. Acta
    radiation therapy: Maximizing the apoptotic cell kill. Radiol. Sci 52: 31-       Oncol 40: 718-724.
    52.


48                                                                                                                                         Volume 09; Issue 01
Ann Case Rep, an open access journal
ISSN: 2574-7754
Citation: Brahme A (2024) New Radiation Oncology Optimization Principles Based On In-Vivo Predictive Assay and Recent Develop-
ments in Molecular Radiation Biology. Ann Case Report 09: 1625. DOI: 10.29011/2574-7754.101625



59. Ågren A, Brahme A, Turesson I (1990) Optimization of uncomplicated        76. Griffit N, Blasko J, Laramor GE (1979) Results of fast neutron beam
    control for head and neck tumors. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 19:           radiotherapy pilot studies at the University of Washington. In High-LET
    1077- 1085.                                                                   Radiations in Clinical Radiotherapy; Barendsen, G.W., Broerse, J.J.,
                                                                                  Breuer, K., Eds.; Pergamon Press: Oxford, UK 23-29.
60. Löf J, Liander A, Kåver G, Lind BK, Brahme A (1998) ORBIT — a
    general object oriented code for radiotherapy optimization. Radiother     77. Tsunemoto H, Umegaki Y, Kutsutani Y, Arai T, Morita S, Kurisu A,
    Oncol 48: S69.                                                                Kawashima K, Maruyama, T. Results of clinical applications of fast
                                                                                  neutrons in Japan. In High-LET Radiations in Clinical Radiotherapy;
61. Brahme A (2002) Development of radiobiologically based therapy                Barendsen, G.W., Broerse, J.J., Breuer, K., Eds.; Pergamon Press:
    optimization and target definition. Proc Second Int Symp on Target            Oxford, UK pp: 75-78.
    Volume Definition in Radiation Oncology. Kiricuta IC (ed.), Inst Radiat
    Oncol, St Vincenz-Hospital, Limburg, Germany.                             78. Maor MH, Hussey DH, Fletcher GH, Jesse RH (1981) Fast neutron
                                                                                  therapy for locally advanced head and neck tumors. Int. J. Radiat.
62. Lindborg L, Brahme A (1990) Influence of microdosimetric quantities           Oncol. Biol. Phys 7: 155-163.
    on observed dose-response relationships in radiation therapy. Radiat
    Res. 124: S23- 8.                                                         79. Laramore GE. (2009) Role of particle radiotherapy in the management
                                                                                  of head and neck cancer. Current Opinion in Oncology 21: 224-231.
63. Tilikidis A, Skog S, Brahme A (1994) Influence of radiation quality
    changes on microdosimetric variance and dose response relation.           80. Griffin TW, Pajak TF, Laramore GE, Duncan W, Richter MP, et al.
    Rad Prot Dosim 52: 43- 49.                                                    (1988) Neutron vs. photon irradiation of inoperable salivary gland
                                                                                  tumors: results of an RTOG- MRC cooperative randomized study Int.
64. Brahme A. (1984) Dosimetric precision requirements in radiation               J. Radiat. Oncol. Biol. Phys. 15: 1085-1090.
    therapy. Acta Radiol Oncol 23: 379-391.
                                                                              81. Russell K J, Caplan R J, Laramore G E, Burnison C M, Maor M H, et al.
65. Tilikidis A, Brahme A. (1994) Microdosimetric description of beam             (1994) Photon versus fast neutron external beam radiotherapy in the
    quality and biological effectiveness in radiation therapy. Acta Oncol         treatment of locally advanced prostate cancer: results of a randomized
    33: 457-469.                                                                  prospective trial Int. J. Radiat. Oncol. Biol. Phys. 28: 47-54.
66. Brahme, A. (2014) Biologically Optimized Light Ion Therapy. Brahme        82. Moffitt GB, Sandison GA, Argento DC, Emery R, Wootton LS, et al.
    A. Ed. in Chief: Comprehensive BioMedical Physics; Major Reference            (2023) Effects of tissue heterogeneity and comparisons of collapsed
    Work; Elsevier: Oxford, UK, pp: 529-554.                                      cone and Monte Carlo fast neutron patient dosimetry using the
67. Cohen L. (1982) Absence of a demonstrable gain factor for neutron             University of Washington clinical neutron therapy system (CNTS).
    beam therapy of epidermoid carcinoma of the head and neck. Int J              Phys. Med. Biol. 68: 245011.
    Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 8: 2173-2176.                                      83. Aaltonen P, Brahme A, Lax I, Levernes S, Näslund I, et al. (1997)
68. Cohen L. (1982) The Tissue Volume Factor In Radiation Oncology. Int.          Specification of dose delivery in radiation therapy. Recommendations
    J. Radiat. Oncol. Biol. Phys 8:1771-1774                                      by the NACP. Acta Oncol 36: 1-32.

69. Ågren-Cronqvist A, Källman P, Turesson I, Brahme A. (1995) Volume         84. Bert C, Graeff C, Riboldi M, Nill S. Baroni G, et al. (2014) Advances in
    and heterogeneity dependence of the dose-response relationship for            4D Treatment Planning for Scanned Particle Beam Therapy. Tech Ca
    head and neck tumours. Acta Oncol 34: 851-860.                                Res Treat 13: 485-495.

70. Lindborg L, Brahme A. (1990) Influence of microdosimetric quantities      85. Nilsson J, Lind BK, Brahme A (2002) Radiation response of hypoxic
    on observed dose-response relationships in radiation therapy. Rad.            and generally heterogeneous tissues. Int J Radiat Biol 78: 389-405.
    Res. 124: S23-S28.                                                        86. Lind BK, Brahme A (2007) The radiation response of heterogeneous
71. Brahme, A. (1999) Optimized radiation therapy based on radiobiological        tumors. Phys Med 23: 91-99.
    objectives. Sem. Radiat. Oncol. 9: 35- 47.                                87. Lazzeroni M. (2013) Production of High Quality 11C Beams for
72. Siddiqi M, Lind BK, Brahme A. (2004) Optimal dose fractionation of            Radiation Treatment and Accurate PET- CT Dose Delivery Verification.
    lung cancer using biologically optimized IMRT. 525 Poster. Radiother          Thesis Dept. Oncology-Pathology Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm.
    Oncol 73: S235.                                                           88. Lazzeroni M, Brahme A (2011) Production of clinically useful positron
73. Austin-Seymour M, Caplan R, Russell K, Laramore GE, Jacky J, et               emitter beams during carbon ion deceleration. Phys Med Biol 56:
    al. (1994) Impact of a multileaf collimator on treatment morbidity in         1585-1600.
    localized carcinoma of the prostate Int. J. Radiat. Oncol. Biol. Phys.    89. Lazzeroni M, Brahme A (2015) Production of pure quasi-
    30: 1065-1071.                                                                monochromatic 11C beams for accurate radiation therapy and dose
74. Eichorhn HJ, Lessel A. (1977) Four years experience with combined             delivery verification Nucl Inst Meth Phys Res 359: 120-130.
    neutron-telecobalt therapy. Int. J. Radiat. Oncol. Biol. Phys. 3: 277-    90. Lazzeroni M, Brahme A (2014) Effective source size, radial, angular
    280.                                                                          and energy spread of therapeutic 11C positron emitter beams
75. Peters LJ, Hussey DH, Fletcher GH, Baumann PA, Olson MH (1979)                produced by 12C fragmentation. Nucl Inst Meth Phys Res 320: 26-36.
    Preliminary report of the M.D Anderson-Texas A.&M. variable energy        91. Penescu L, Stora T, Stegemann S, Pitters J, Fiorina E, et al. (2022)
    cyclotron fast neutron therapy pilot study. Amer. J. Roentgenol. 132:         Technical Design Report for a Carbon-11 Treatment Facility. Front.
    637-642.                                                                      Med 8: 697235.


49                                                                                                                                      Volume 09; Issue 01
Ann Case Rep, an open access journal
ISSN: 2574-7754
Citation: Brahme A (2024) New Radiation Oncology Optimization Principles Based On In-Vivo Predictive Assay and Recent Develop-
ments in Molecular Radiation Biology. Ann Case Report 09: 1625. DOI: 10.29011/2574-7754.101625



92. Boscolo D, Kostyleva D, Safari MJ, Anagnostatou V, Äystö J, et al.            107. Peng X, Zhang MQ, Conserva F, Hosny G, Selivanova G, et al. (2013)
    (2021) Radioactive Beams for Image-Guided Particle Therapy: The                    APR-246/PRIMA-1MET inhibits thioredoxin reductase 1 and converts
    BARB Experiment at GSI. Front. Oncol 11: 737050.                                   the enzyme to a dedicated NADPH oxidase. Cell Death Dis 4: e881.
93. Rubbia C, Ferrari A, Kadi Y, Vlachoudis V. (2006) Beam cooling with           108. Haffo L, Lu J, Bykov VJN, Martin SS, Ren X, et al. (2018) Inhibition of
    ionization losses, Nucl Instr Meth Phys Res A 568: 475-487.                        the glutaredoxin and thioredoxin systems and ribonucleotide reductase
                                                                                       by mutant p53-targeting compound APR-246. Sci Rep 8: 12671.
94. Brahme A, Källman P, Lind BK (1989) Optimization of proton and
    heavy ion therapy using an adaptive inversion algorithm. Radiother            109. Tessoulin B, Descamps G, Morea P, Maı ̈ga S, Lod ́e L, et al. (2014)
    Oncol 15: 189-197.                                                                 PRIMA-1 Met induces myeloma cell death independent of p53 by
                                                                                       impairing the GSH/ROS balance. Blood 124: 1626-1636.
95. Brahme A (2010) Optimal use of light ions for radiation therapy. Radiol
    Sci 53: 35- 61.                                                               110. Xie X, Fan C, Luo B, Zhang J, Jensen LD, et al. (2023) APR-246
                                                                                       Enhances Colorectal Cancer Sensitivity to Radiotherapy.
96. Ureba A, Ödén J, Toma-Dasu I, Lazzeroni M (2022) Photon and
    Proton Dose Painting Based on Oxygen Distribution - Feasibility               111. Cooks T, Michaeli O, Luz I, Vatarescu M, Weizmann N, (2023)
    Study and Tumour Control Probability Assessment. In: Scholkmann,                   Reactivation of p53 as a radiosensitization strategy for mutant p53
    F., LaManna, J., Wolf, U. (eds) Oxygen Transport to Tissue XLIII.                  cancers treated with high-LET radiotherapy.
    Advances in Experimental Medicine and Biology 1395: 223-228.
                                                                                  112. Joiner MC. Bentzen SM (2009) Fractionation: the linear-quadratic
97. Imai R, Kamada T, Araki N. (2016) Carbon ion radiation therapy for                 approach. In Joiner M. van der Kogel Ed. Basic Clinical Radiobiology.
    unresectable sacral chordoma: An analysis of 188 cases. Int J Radiat               Hodder Arnold, London 8: 102-119.
    Oncol Biol Phys 95: 322-327.
                                                                                  113. Shuryak I, Hall EJ, Brenner DJ (2019) Optimized Hypofractionation
98. Serizawa I, Imai R, Kamada T, Tsuji H, Kishimoto R, et al. (2009)                  Can Markedly Improve Tumor Control and Decrease Late Effects for
    Changes in Tumor Volume of Sacral Chordoma After Carbon Ion                        Head and Neck Cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 104: 272-278.
    Radiotherapy. Journal of Computer Assisted Tomography 33: 795-798.
                                                                                  114. Piras A, Boldrini L, Menna S, Venuti V, Pernice G, et al. (2021)
99. Dong M, Liu R, Zhang Q, Wang, Luo H, et al. (2023) Efficacy and                    Hypofractionated Radiotherapy in Head and Neck Cancer Elderly
    safety of carbon ion radiotherapy for chordomas: a systematic review               Patients: A Feasibility and Safety Systematic Review for the Clinician.
    and meta-analysis Radiation Oncology 18: 152.                                      Front. Oncol 11: 761393.
100. Wu PC, Wang Q, Grobman L, Chu E, Wu DY (2012) Accelerated                    115. Elbers, JBW, Gunsch, PA, Debets R, Keereweer S, Van Meerten E,
     cellular senescence in solid tumor therapy. Exp Oncol 34: 298-305.                et al. (2023) HYpofractionated, dose-redistributed RAdiotherapy with
                                                                                       protons and photons to combat radiation-induced immunosuppression
101. Gorgoulis V, Adams PD, Alimonti A, Bennett DC, Bishop O, et al.                   in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma: study protocol of the
     (2019) Cellular Senescence: Defining a Path Forward. Cell 179: 813-               phase I HYDRA trial. BMC Cancer 23: 541.
     827.
                                                                                  116. Grimm J, Marks LB, Jackson A. Kavanagh BD. Xue J. et al (2021) High
102. Brahme, A. (1993) Optimization of radiation therapy and the                       Dose per Fraction, Hypofractionated Treatment Effects in the Clinic
     development of multileaf collimation. Editorial. Int. J. Rad. Oncol. Biol.        (HyTEC): An Overview Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 110: 1-10.
     Phys 25: 373-375.
                                                                                  117. Brand DH, Kirby AM, Yarnold JR, Somaiah N (2022) How Low. Can.
103. Hall, E.J.; Wuu, C.S. (2003) Radiation-Induced Second Cancers: The                You Go? The Radiobiology of Hypofractionation. Clin. Oncol 34: 280-
     Impact of 3D-CRT and IMRT. Int. J. Radiat. Oncol. Biol. Phys 56: 83-              287.
     88.
                                                                                  118. Corkum MT, Achard V, Morton G, Zilli T (2022) Ultrahypofractionated
104. Bykov VJN, Eriksson SE, Bianchi J, Wiman KG. (2018) Targeting                     Radiotherapy for Localized Prostate Cancer: How Far Can We Go?
     mutant p53 for efficient cancer therapy. Nat Rev Cancer 18: 89-102.               Clin Oncol 34: 340-349.
105. Perdrix A, Najem A, Saussez S, Awada AJourne F, Ghanem G, et al.             119. Brada M, Forbes H, Ashley S, Fenwick J (2022) Improving Outcomes
     (2017) PRIMA-1 and PRIMA-1MET (APR-246): From Mutant/Wild                         in NSCLC: Optimum Dose Fractionation in Radical Radiotherapy
     Type p53 Reactivation to Unexpected Mechanisms Underlying Their                   Matters. J Thorac Oncol 17: 532-543.
     Potent Anti-Tumor Effect in Combinatorial Therapies. Cancers 9: 172.
                                                                                  120. Brahme A (2000) Development of radiation therapy optimization. Acta
106. Furukawa H, Makino T, Yamasaki M, Tanaka K, Miyazaki Y, et al.                    Oncol 39: 579-595.
     (2018) PRIMA-1 induces p53-mediated apoptosis by upregulating
     Noxa in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma with TP53 missense                121. Horsman MR, Sørensen BS, Busk M, Siemann DW (2021) Therapeutic
     mutation. Cancer Sci 109: 412-421.                                                Modification of Hypoxia Clin Oncol 33: 492-509.




50                                                                                                                                          Volume 09; Issue 01
Ann Case Rep, an open access journal
ISSN: 2574-7754
