The Effect of Noise on the Performance of
Variational Algorithms for Quantum Chemistry
Waheeda Saib

Ismail Akhalwaya

Petros Wallden

arXiv:2108.12388v1 [quant-ph] 27 Aug 2021

IBM Quantum, IBM Research-Africa University of Edinburgh
Edinburgh, Scotland
Johannesburg, South Africa
petros.wallden@ed.ac.uk
wsaib@za.ibm.com

IBM Research-Africa, University of the Witwatersrand
Johannesburg, South Africa
ismaila@za.ibm.com

one needs to focus on methods and algorithms that directly
mitigate the effects of noise. Variational quantum algorithms
(VQA), a class of hybrid quantum classical algorithms, are
designed to break the problem in question to a part that uses
the quantumness (and is in principle intractable classically),
while delegate the remaining part to classical computers. The
Variational Quantum Eigensolver (VQE) [5]–[7] was one of
the first such algorithm and is designed to approximate the
ground state energy of a Hamiltonian. VQE is naturally well
suited to recover the ground state energy of small molecules
[3]. A crucial component of VQE, is the selection of a suitable
parameterized circuit or ansatz that represents the solution
space of the problem. The two types of ansatze that exist
in literature, are the “problem specific” ansatz that uses the
details of the problem one attempts to solve (e.g. the coupled
cluster method [2], [3] for chemistry problems), and the
hardware efficient ansatz [2], [3], [7] that chooses a family
of states that is “easy” for the hardware one uses, but can be
used for any problem. In this contribution we focus on the
latter (hardware efficient) and when we refer to ansatz in the
remaining text it is understood as hardware efficient ansatz.
Many different ansatze exist. Interestingly the effects of
(specific) noise affect the performance of each of these ansatze
within a VQE algorithm differently. In this work, we want
to assess the effect of noise on the decision of which ansatz
family gives more accurate results in practice. First, we study
the effect of noise on the different ansatze by benchmarking
and ranking the performance of each ansatz family by expressibility as well as by its performance on a chemistry application
using VQE. The simulated results demonstrate the ranking
of optimal circuits does not remain constant in the presence
of noise. Second, the expressibility measure is evaluated by
performing a correlation study between expressibility and the
performance of the circuits on a quantum chemistry problem
using VQE for ideal and noisy quantum conditions. The results
reveal, expressibility displays a weak correlation and is not
an appropriate measure to quantify the efficacy of parameterized quantum circuits in the quantum chemistry domain.
The underlying reason for this weak correlation is examined
by performing non-uniform parameter sampling, that shows a
significant increase in expressibility by simply changing the
parameter sampling methodology for a given circuit. Third,
the effect of noise models based on different quantum devices

Abstract—Variational quantum algorithms are suitable for use
on noisy quantum systems. One of the most important use-cases
is the quantum simulation of materials, using the variational
quantum eigensolver (VQE). To optimize VQE performance, a
suitable parameterized quantum circuit (ansatz) must be selected.
We investigate a class of ansatze that incorporates knowledge of
the quantum hardware, namely the hardware efficient ansatze.
The performance of hardware efficient ansatze is affected differently by noise, and our goal is to study the effect of noise on
evaluating which ansatz gives more accurate results in practice.
First, we study the effect of noise on the different hardware
efficient ansatze by benchmarking and ranking the performance
of each ansatz family (i) on a chemistry application using VQE
and (ii) by the recently established metric of “expressibility”.
The results demonstrate the ranking of optimal circuits does not
remain constant in the presence of noise. Second, we evaluate
the suitability of the expressibility measure in this context by
performing a correlation study between expressibility and the
performance of the same circuits on a chemistry application using
VQE. Our simulations reveal a weak correlation and therefore
demonstrate that expressibility is not an adequate measure to
quantify the effectiveness of parameterized quantum circuits for
quantum chemistry. Third, we evaluate the effect of different
quantum device noise models on the ordering of which ansatz
family is best. Interestingly, we see that to decide which ansatz
is optimal for use, one needs to consider the specific hardware
used even within the same family of quantum hardware.
Index Terms—quantum computing, variational quantum algorithm, quantum noise, expressibility

I. I NTRODUCTION
One of the early inspirations that led to the development
of quantum computation was Feynman’s view that quantum
systems are better in simulating other quantum systems [1].
More recently, precisely for this reason (fundamental quantum
nature), quantum chemistry has been identified as one of
the most promising fields to demonstrate useful quantum
computational advantage [2]. Examples that could benefit from
such endeavors is the comprehensive analysis of chemical
systems, their properties and reaction rates, which may yield
advancements on currently intractable problems such as designing new drugs and catalysts to aid the biological process
of nitrogen fixation [2]–[4].
Existing and near term quantum hardware have several
shortcomings such as limited qubit number, qubit connectivity
and importantly, gate errors and decoherence. It is therefore
impossible to run quantum error correction on them and

1

where hα denotes a real scalar coefficient and α represents
the term in the Hamiltonian [2], [3]. The expectation value of
each Pauli term in the problem Hamiltonian is estimated by
repeatedly running the trial state preparation and measurement
steps (where the corresponding Pauli observable is measured).
Third, On the classical computer the expectation values of
Pα are summed with corresponding weights hα to calculate
the total energy or cost function [3].
X
E(θ) = hΨ(θ)|H|Ψ(θ)i =
hα hΨ(θ)|Pα |Ψ(θ)i (2)

are examined on the ranking of the best performing circuits.
The simulations demonstrate, the order of the optimal circuits
to use for a given problem does not remain constant as the
performance of the circuits vary with different noise levels,
even within the same family of quantum hardware.
This work facilitates a deeper understanding of how
quantum device noise impacts the decision of the ansatz
family to use even among different devices that have the
same quantum computing hardware and provides new insight
into the applicability of the, widely used, expressibility metric.

α

Fourth, the classical optimization method is used to generate
a new set of parameters θ that minimize the total energy
or cost function [13]. The new parameters are fed into the
parameterized gates on the quantum circuit to prepare a new
trial state [2]. The aim being to find the quantum state that
has the smallest energy and thus to get an approximation of
the actual ground state energy. This process is repeated until
the optimal parameters are found that generate the minimal
energy within an acceptable accuracy [3]. There are several
components of the VQE algorithm that may be improved to
increase the performance of the algorithm. The components
that may be modified are the trial state or ansatz, classical
optimization methods, mappings from fermions to qubits,
circuit optimization and error mitigation techniques [3]. In this
contribution we focus on the choice of ansatz.
1) Hardware Efficient Ansatz: The hardware efficient
ansatz (HEA) is a parameterized quantum circuit that consists
of a series of parameterized single qubit gates and two-qubit
entangling gates that are tailored to the quantum gate set of the
available quantum hardware [3]. The main benefit of hardware
efficient ansatz is that it is domain agnostic and versatile, as it
has been demonstrated to perform well on quantum chemistry
[7] and quantum machine learning problems [14].
2) Simultaneous Perturbation Stochastic Approximation:
The classical optimization method, simultaneous perturbation
stochastic approximation (SPSA) has been successfully applied to noisy quantum chemistry problems, that find the
ground state energy of small molecules [7]. The SPSA method
reduces the sampling overhead by approximating the gradient
using two energy estimates irrespective of the parameter space
dimension [7].

II. R ELATED WORKS
The review [2] highlights that studies comparing the effectiveness of ansatz have been performed for small chemistry
problems, but the focus is different from our work. The
expressibility measure was developed to offer insight on the
selection of parameterized circuit for a given task or algorithm
[8]. Expressibility was used to understand and evaluate the
capability of quantum circuits employed in quantum chemistry
and quantum machine learning literature [8]. Recent literature,
used expressibility to benchmark parameterized quantum circuits for quantum machine learning applications [9] and to
assess the alternating layered ansatz for a quantum chemistry
application [10], under ideal quantum conditions. In our work,
we build on this literature to assess the ability of the expressibility measure to identify effective ansatze for a chemistry
problem under noise-free and noisy quantum conditions.
Recent studies exploring the effect of noise on variational
quantum algorithms, employed different noise models, types of
noise and noise levels to assess the VQE performance using the
hardware efficient ansatz [11], [12]. These studies only explore
two specific hardware efficient circuit layouts with different
parameterized gates and circuit layers, while the effect of noise
is not as well studied for quantum chemistry. We complete this
analysis by considering a wider class of ansatze and examine
the effects it has for the specific application of quantum
chemistry using VQE.
III. M ETHODS
A. Variational Quantum Eigensolver
The VQE algorithm is used to approximate the ground state
energy of quantum systems [3], [7]. It consists of four main
tasks. First, the quantum computer is used to prepare an initial
trial quantum state |ψ(θ)i by assigning a set of parameters θ
to parameterized gates on the quantum circuit [3].
Second, the associated energy of each trial state is estimated
by using the Hamiltonian averaging method. In this step the
Hamiltonian is decomposed into Pauli terms Pα = σ1 α1 ⊗
σ2 α2 ⊗ ...σN αN , with N representing the number of qubits
and each Pauli operator in Pα representing one of I, X, Y, Z
such that the Hamilton is represented as a linear combination
of Pauli terms
H=

X

hα Pα

B. Expressibility
Expressibility is defined as the ability of a parameterized
quantum circuit (PQC) to produce quantum states that represent the Hilbert space well [8]. The expressibility measure has
been proposed as a new approach to benchmark the capability
of parameterized quantum circuits [8]. A principled approach
to quantify expressibility is outlined, by statistically computing
numerical simulations of the parameterized quantum circuit
[8]. The method to estimate expressibility, compares the probability distribution of quantum state fidelities computed from
a set of quantum states sampled from the PQC to the uniform
distribution of quantum fidelities from the ensemble of Haar
random states [8]. The expressibility method may be broken

(1)

α

2

down into four main steps. First, the parameterized quantum
circuit is selected and initialized with parameters represented
by θ. Second, the distribution of quantum fidelities for the PQC
are computed by uniformly sampling pairs of parameters and
their associated quantum states. Quantum states are simulated
by applying parameter vectors to the quantum circuit, thereafter the fidelity is computed by obtaining the squared overlap
F = |hψθ |ψφ i|2 of two quantum states [8]. This experiment
is repeated for M samples to create a probability distribution
of fidelities from the PQC P̂P QC (F ; θ). Third, the analytical
method to compute the probability density function of fidelities
for the ensemble of Haar random states is expressed as
PHaar (F ) = (N − 1)(1 − F )N −2 where N is the dimension
of the Hilbert space and F represents the fidelity [8], [15].
Fourth, the two probability distributions are discretized with
a histogram and used to estimate the Kullback-Leibler (KL)
divergence [16], which is measured by taking the difference
between the probability distribution of fidelities for the PQC
from the ensemble of Haar random states to attain the value
for expressibility
Expr = DKL (P̂P QC (F ; θ)||PHaar (F ))

IV. E XPERIMENTAL DESIGN AND SETUP
In this study, we explore different variations of the hardware
efficient ansatz to assess the effect of noise on the decision of
ansatz family to use for a quantum chemistry application.
The hardware optimized circuit designs, outlined in Appendix, consist of parameterized single and two-qubit gates
with a circuit depth of one and a circuit width of four qubits.
The ideal and noisy quantum simulations are performed using
the qasm simulator. The IBM Quantum Experience platform
was used to generate circuit visualizations and access quantum
device simulators with different noise models. The Qiskit
framework [18] was used to implement our simulations. The
experiments performed under noisy quantum conditions employed the 5 qubit IBMQX2 quantum device noise model. The
experiments are performed on ideal and noisy IBM quantum
simulators to understand and compare the performance of the
methods under realistic noisy conditions.
A. Chemistry problem
The electronic structure problem is concerned with finding
the ground state energy of a molecular or chemical system
[2]. We restrict ourselves to the hydrogen H2 molecule, since
it is a problem that has known results. We use it to benchmark
and evaluate the performance of the hardware efficient circuits
using the VQE algorithm, under noise-free and noisy quantum
conditions.

(3)

Expressibility can hence be defined as the amount of information lost when estimating the probability distribution of state
fidelities from a PQC using the ensemble of Haar random
states fidelities [8]. It follows that the smaller the value of
expressibility, the closer to true random states (and thus the
more expressible) is the parameterized circuit family.

B. Mapping the chemistry problem to quantum computation
To map a molecule to qubits requires few assumptions.
The Born-Oppenheimer approximation is applied to simplify
the molecular Hamiltonian of hydrogen by fixing the nuclei
positions, since the nuclei are much larger than the electrons,
they may be regarded as stationary classical particles [13].
The resulting Hamiltonian takes the fixed nuclei positions as
parameters. The Hamiltonian is converted to second quantization using a basis set, STO-3G, which is a set of distinct
functions, that approximately describes the spin-orbitals of
a molecule [2]. The Hamiltonian in second quantization is
expressed in terms of creation and annihilation operators [2].
Finally, we map the creation and annihilation operators of
the Hamiltonian, to qubit operators using the Jordan-Wigner
transformation [2], to attain a four qubit system for H2 [13].

C. Noise model
The IBM Quantum Experience provides access to several
quantum processors with different qubit number, quantum volume, and noise levels [11]. Since the fundamental performance
of the quantum processor is characterized by a set of error
parameters namely, average gate error for one and two-qubit
gates, gate duration, one qubit measurement error probabilities,
T1 and T2 decoherence time for every qubit. The basic noise
model of a quantum device may be constructed from these
backend error parameters using Qiskit and implemented using
Qiskit Aer, a high performance simulator, to simulate noisy
quantum conditions [17].
In comparison with noisy quantum devices the basic noise
model makes several assumptions. The gate and measurement
errors are assumed to be local and Markovian, that is crosstalk and leakage errors are excluded [17]. Gate errors are
approximated by incoherent noise processes and modeled by
a combination of depolarizing and thermal relaxation error
[17]. The single qubit gate errors are modeled by single
qubit depolarizing error and single qubit thermal relaxation
error characterized by T1, T2 and gate duration [18]. Twoqubit gates consist of two-qubit depolarizing error followed by
single qubit thermal relaxation errors for both gate qubits [18].
The strength of the depolarizing error is selected such that the
gate error represents the average gate error from benchmarking
experiments on the IBM quantum processors [17].

C. The effect of noise on circuit ranking
We compute and rank the performance of each ansatz
using (i) the expressibility measure and (ii) by comparing
the solution found using VQE with the (known in this case)
ground state energy of a chemistry application.
1) VQE Experiments: Solving the electronic structure problem using the VQE algorithm appears a promising approach to
useful quantum computational advantage [2], [5], [6], but has
also been used as a quantum chemistry simulation benchmark
for near term quantum computers [19]. Here we use VQE to
benchmark the hardware efficient circuits under noise-free and
noisy quantum conditions.

3

The molecular system of hydrogen H2 is transformed into
the molecular Hamiltonian using the Qiskit Nature driver for
the PySCF library in the STO-3G basis [18]. The PySCF
library, is an open source computational chemistry library [20].
The VQE algorithm is implemented using the VQE standard
established in [7]. The classical optimizer applied to the VQE
algorithm, as established in [7], is the SPSA optimizer. Since
SPSA reduces the number of gradient computations required
per iteration and performs well for fermionic optimization
problems, this method is suitable for variational quantum
algorithms applied to quantum chemistry [21]. The SPSA optimizer was employed for a maximum number of 200 iterations,
to reduce the run time of the experiment. The performance
metric used to assess the accuracy of the VQE simulations
is the energy difference, which is the difference between the
minimum energy reached by the simulation and the actual
ground state energy of hydrogen H2 . The performance of the
hardware optimized circuits applied to VQE are presented in
Table I and Table II for ideal and noisy quantum simulations.
2) Expressibility Experiments: The procedure to estimate
expressibility is performed by first, selecting a parameterized
circuit that may be initialized by θ. Second, we uniformly sample two parameters that are applied to the parameterized circuit
to generate the quantum states. Third, the two quantum states
are used to attain the fidelity by computing the squared overlap
between the states. In the ideal simulation the quantum states
are pure, whereas in the noisy simulations the quantum states
are mixed which requires further computation to attain the
average of the quantum states, before the fidelity is obtained.
This process is repeated 5000 times to attain a distribution
of quantum state fidelities for each circuit in the Appendix.
Fourth, the distribution of Haar random state fidelities, is
analytically computed using PHaar (F ) = (N − 1)(1 − F )N −2
where N represents the dimensionality of the Hilbert space and
F is the fidelity. Fifth, the fidelity distributions from the parameterized circuit and the Haar random states are discretized
using a histogram with a bin size of 75. A sample size of
5000 and a bin size of 75 were selected in order to reproduce
the experiments and attain agreement for the hardware efficient
circuit in [8]. Sixth, the expressibility measure is computed by
taking the KL divergence between the probability distribution
of state fidelities generated from the parameterized circuit and
the Haar random states. The expressibility for the circuits are
estimated and shown in the Appendix at Table III and Table IV
for ideal and noisy quantum simulations.
3) Variation of two-qubit gates: The different ansatze used
in this benchmark study consist of single and two-qubit
entangling gates. The two-qubit gates used are the controlledZ (CZ) and controlled-NOT (CX) gates. We use three fixed
circuit designs, but we vary the type of two-qubit gates used.
For example circuit 1 has only CX two-qubit gates, circuit 2
only CZ two-qubit gates, while circuits 3 to 8 have a mixture
of CX and CZ gates. The expressibility and VQE results of
the circuits with different types and arrangements of two-qubit
gates may be viewed in Table I and Table II for ideal and noisy
quantum simulations.

4) Evaluation of the Expressibility measure: To assess the
strength of the expressibility measure to estimate the capability
of parameterized quantum circuits, we statistically analyzed
the correlation between expressibility and the performance of
hardware efficient circuits on a chemistry application using the
VQE algorithm. The Pearson correlation coefficient and scatter
plot diagrams are used to assess and visualize the relationship
between expressibility and the energy difference. The Pearson
correlation coefficient measures the strength of the relationship
between two quantitative variables, assuming the relationship
is linear [22]. Pandas, a python library for data analysis and
statistics [23], is used to compute the Pearson correlation coefficient between the expressibility and energy difference values
for the hardware efficient circuits in the Appendix. The scatter
plot diagrams were generated to show the relationship between
the expressibility and energy difference values for each circuit
in the Appendix. The scatter plot diagrams produced for ideal
and noisy quantum simulations may be viewed in Fig. 1 and
Fig. 2.
We further assess whether the expressibility of a circuit
remains constant or can be changed simply by changing
the parameter sampling method used. This experiment is
performed by using non-uniform parameter sampling instead
of uniform sampling of the parameter space when estimating
the expressibility measure of a fixed circuit. The expressibility
computed for the fixed circuit shown in Fig. 3, using nonuniform parameter sampling, is visualized in Fig. 4.
D. The effect of different noise models on circuit ranking
To examine the effect of different noise models on the
hardware optimized circuits, we ranked and evaluated the
performance of the circuits applied to a chemistry problem
using VQE for different IBM Quantum device noise models.
Since depolarizing noise has been shown to accumulate with
increased circuit depth [11], the circuits under investigation
have been fixed with a circuit depth of one. The experiment,
utilizes the noise model from existing IBM quantum processors. The results demonstrating the variation in circuit ranking
for different noise models are shown in Fig. 5.
V. R ESULTS
A. VQE performance observations
We compute and assess the performance of different ansatze
when used within VQE to estimate the ground state energy of
H2 . The results are summarized in Table I for ideal and Table II
for noisy quantum simulations. The tables contain information
on the circuit ID as defined in the Appendix, the two-qubit
gates used, the expressibility of the circuit, the computed
ground state energy of hydrogen and the energy difference
between the computed energy and the (known in this case) true
ground state energy measured in hartree units. The true ground
state energy of hydrogen is -1.1373 hartree. The estimated
ground state energy, and the corresponding energy difference,
for a given ansatz is computed from the energy of the circuit
with the optimal parameters, i.e. the parameters that give
the lowest energy for our problem. We rank the circuits by

4

perform better than circuits with only CX gates. This is due to
the fact that CX gates are not native to IBM Quantum devices
[24], [25]. This means that to really implement such a gate, a
combination of other gates are used, and thus the true noise of
CX gates are much higher. The results are in agreement with
prior works, since circuit 2 was shown to perform well for our
problem in [7] and indeed it displays the optimal performance
in Table II.
It is interesting to note certain configurations of the CZ
and CX gates appear to perform better than the circuits with
only CZ or CX gates, despite the fact that CX are actually
genuinely more noisy in the architecture (and noise model) we
consider. This motivates further research into identifying features of specific configurations of two-qubit gates that improve
performance for specific problems (e.g. chemistry) or more
generically. We, naturally, observe decreased performance as
the noise level increases as also shown in [11].

TABLE I
R ANKING OF ANSATZE BY VQE SIMULATION OF HYDROGEN ON IDEAL
QUANTUM SIMULATOR

Circuit
ID

Gates

Expressibility

9
3
7
8
1
12
11
5
4
6
2
10

CX
CX,CZ,CX,CZ
CZ,CX,CX,CZ
CZ,CZ,CX,CX
CX
CX
CZ
CX,CX,CZ,CZ
CX,CZ,CZ,CX
CZ,CX,CZ,CX
CZ
CZ

0.648
0.229
0.224
0.240
0.224
0.020
0.027
0.205
0.234
0.202
0.226
0.691

Ground
state
energy
-1.1211
-1.1205
-1.1201
-1.1194
-1.1192
-1.1190
-1.1184
-1.1179
-1.1174
-1.1155
-1.1088
-0.5276

Energy
diff. from
correct
0.0161
0.0167
0.0171
0.0178
0.0180
0.0182
0.0188
0.0193
0.0198
0.0218
0.0284
0.6096

ascending values of the computed ground state energy and
energy difference, that is presented in descending order from
the best to the worst performing circuits, shown by the circuit
ID column in Table I for ideal and Table II for noisy quantum
simulations. This allows us to monitor both the performance
and to compare the correlation of performance of an ansatz
with its expressibility.
Ideal simulations. In Table I we observe that circuits 9 and
3 perform best (smallest energy difference – 0.0161 and
0.0167 hartree respectively). Circuits 10 and 2 are the worst
performing circuits (0.6096 and 0.0284 hartree). While in
general we see that circuits with CX gates perform better than
similar ones with CZ gates, interestingly we note that circuits
3, 7 and 8, that have mixed arrangements of the CX and CZ
gates, perform better than circuit 1 that has only CX gates.
Noisy simulations. In Table II we observe that circuits 2 and
4 perform best in a noisy environment (energy differences
0.2089 and 0.2109 hartree). Circuits 10 and 9 perform worst
(0.7846 and 0.2975 hartree). The quantum circuits 4,7 and
5 with different variations of two-qubit gates CX and CZ,

B. Expressibility observations
Here we use the expressibility measure to order the different
ansatze in the ideal and noisy scenarios.
Ideal simulations. As we can see in Appendix at Table III,
circuits 12 and 11 are the most expressible circuits (0.020 and
0.027). The circuits with the least expressibility are circuits
10 and 9 (0.691 and 0.648). The circuits 6 and 5 demonstrate
that circuits with alternating two-qubit gates may provide more
expressible circuits than circuits 1 and 2 with only CX or
CZ gates. This is an interesting finding that warrants further
research into the optimal arrangements of two-qubit gates. The
expressibility results of [8], uses our circuit 2 and obtains the
same value of 0.2.
Noisy simulations. The results are summarized in Table IV.
It is interesting to note that the order of circuits is very
different. Circuits 12 and 11 do not have high expressibility
under noisy conditions (0.946 and 1.459). Of circuits 10
and 9, only circuit 10 supports its previous expressibility
assessment as being the least expressible circuit. Circuits 5
and 6 with alternating CX and CZ gates no longer demonstrate
high expressibility as shown in the ideally simulated results
(Table III). Circuits 2 and 1 with only CZ or CX gates are the
most expressible circuits now. To the best of our knowledge
this is the first study to assess the expressibility measure
under noisy quantum conditions. Since there is disagreement
between the expressibility experiments performed on ideal and
noisy quantum simulators, this indicates that we should not use
the ideal expressibility results to identify optimal circuits that
may be used in a realistic noisy setting.
The optimal circuits identified by the expressibility measure shows little agreement with the optimal circuit ranking
identified by the VQE method, both in the ideal and noisy
settings.

TABLE II
R ANKING OF ANSATZE BY VQE SIMULATION OF HYDROGEN ON NOISY
QUANTUM SIMULATOR

Circuit
ID

Gates

Expressibility

2
4
7
5
12
11
8
3
6
1
9
10

CZ
CX,CZ,CZ,CX
CZ,CX,CX,CZ
CX,CX,CZ,CZ
CX
CZ
CZ,CZ,CX,CX
CX,CZ,CX,CZ
CZ,CX,CZ,CX
CX
CX
CZ

0.673
0.715
0.832
0.885
0.946
1.459
0.747
0.731
0.899
0.698
0.835
2.668

Ground
state
energy
-0.9283
-0.9263
-0.9186
0.9104
-0.9084
-0.9001
-0.8967
-0.8826
-0.8805
-0.8718
-0.8397
-0.3526

Energy
diff. from
correct
0.2089
0.2109
0.2186
0.2268
0.2288
0.2371
0.2405
0.2546
0.2567
0.2655
0.2975
0.7846

C. Evaluation of the expressibility measure
We evaluate the use of the expressibility measure in the
context of VQE by computing the correlation between the

5

performance of circuits applied to a chemistry application using VQE and the estimated expressibility of the same circuits
(Appendix). We analyze this relationship in two ways: we
compute the Pearson correlation coefficient [22] that measures
the strength of (a hypothetical) linear relationship and we
visualize the relation of the two variables by generating the
scatter plot diagrams. An outlier circuit that had the greatest
deviation under ideal and noisy quantum conditions for both
values of expressibility and energy difference was circuit 10.
Since outlier data points affect correlation studies, we removed
circuit 10 from the correlation analysis for both ideal and noisy
conditions.
The scatter plot diagrams are presented in Fig. 1 and Fig. 2
for noise-free and noisy quantum simulation experiments
respectively. Each circuit in Appendix, is represented by a
data point on the diagram.

Fig. 2 depicts the noisy case. The relationship of the
expressibility and the energy difference measure for noisy
quantum simulations is weak. This is confirmed by the Pearson
correlation coefficient of 0.012 which is even weaker than the
ideal case (and with opposite sign).
To assess the underlying reason for the weak correlation
between expressibility and the energy difference measure,
we explore how non-uniform parameter sampling affects the
expressibility measure instead of uniform sampling of the
parameter space. The non-uniform parameter sampling method
used to compute the expressibility measure for the fixed
circuit, Fig. 3, is
θRZ = cos−1 r1 + π × H(0.5 − r2 )

(4)

where H(·) is the Heaviside step function [26] and r1 ∼
U (−1, 1) and r2 ∼ U (0, 1) with U as the uniform distribution.

Fig. 3. Parameterized quantum circuit

The expressibility of the circuit of Fig. 3 is graphically
presented in Fig. 4 by employing non-uniform sampling of
the circuit 5000 times to attain a distribution of quantum state
fidelities that are overlaid on the Haar fidelity distribution. The
expressibility measure of the one qubit circuit of Fig. 3, is 0.02
using uniform sampling and 0.007 using non-uniform parameter sampling, which corresponds to the most expressible circuit
case outlined in [8]. Hence this result demonstrates that simply
using non-uniform parameter sampling considerably boosts the
expressibility of a given circuit.

Fig. 1. Scatter plot of expressibility and VQE energy difference without noise

Fig. 1 represents the ideal case. We estimate the Pearson
correlation coefficient at -0.195, this indicates there is a
negative, non-linear relationship that exhibits very weak or
no strength between expressibility and the energy difference
for noise-free quantum simulations. The Pearson correlation
coefficient confirms the observations from the scatter plot
diagram for the noise-free simulations.

Fig. 4. Fidelity distribution of PQC overlaid on Haar fidelity distribution
using non-uniform sampling

We conclude that expressibility is not a good measure to use
for ansatze in order to use them for VQE since it shows small
(if any) correlation with the performance of the circuit family
while one could improve the expressibility (and possibly the
performance in VQE) of an ansatz by non-uniform sampling.

Fig. 2. Scatter plot of expressibility and VQE energy difference with noise

6

VI. D ISCUSSION

D. The effect of different noise models on circuit ranking

A. The effect of noise on the ranking of optimal circuits
In this section we examine the effects of noise on the
ordering of hardware efficient ansatze, by ranking the performance of the circuits applied to VQE for different noise
models within the same hardware family. This enables us to
assess how the circuit ranking is affected by different models
of noise and ultimately how this affects the decision of the
ansatz family to use for a quantum chemistry problem.

We evaluated several circuit variations with different types
and arrangements of two-qubit gates (CZ, CX). The performance of the circuits for computing the ground state energy of
H2 is summarized in Table I for ideal and Table II for the noisy
case. We expected that the performance of the circuits would
decrease when noise was applied to the VQE experiments and
a slight variation of the order was also anticipated. However
we observed that the circuit ranking under noisy conditions
varies significantly from the ideal one (e.g. circuit 9 changes
from the best under ideal setting to the second worst in noisy
conditions). This demonstrates that the ranking of optimal
circuits identified under ideal quantum conditions does not
persist with noise and for more informed decisions one needs
to select the optimal ansatz using quantum simulations on
noisy quantum simulators or real devices.

The line graph diagrams visually demonstrate the variation
in the circuit ordering when different noise models are applied
to the VQE simulations. The circuits in Appendix have been
employed in this study with the exception of circuits 3 to 8,
since these experiments concern circuit designs that have only
CZ or CX gates. Circuits 1,2, 9-12 are represented by distinctly
colored lines to identify and compare the ranking of the circuits in the line graph diagrams. The circuits 1,2,9,10,11,12 are
represented by the circuit names RY CX, RY CZ, HRX CX,
HRX CZ, RYRZ CZ, RYRZ CX in Fig. 5.

B. Circuit ranking on the same family of quantum hardware
Next we analyzed the effect of different noise models on
the circuit performance by comparing the ranking of the
circuits across different noise models (taken from real IBM
quantum devices). On existing quantum computers, circuits
are transpiled into the native gate set of the selected device,
this may be costly in terms of the contributed noise, time
taken and the number of two-qubit gates implemented on
the resulting circuit [8]. The ranking of the circuits for the
different noise models are shown in Fig. 5. We observe that
the circuit ranking changes depending on the intensity of the
noise present in the noise model and the native gate set of
the quantum device used by the noise model. Interestingly,
we note that the order of the optimal ansatz family does not
remain constant even for the same family of IBM quantum
hardware. We note that to decide on the optimal ansatz
to use, numerical simulations performed in the absence of
noise, or on even slightly different noise models, should not
be used to justify optimal circuits to use in practice, since
circuit performance is closely coupled to the noise model
of the specific quantum hardware used. These findings are
in agreement with earlier works stressing the importance of
coupling the quantum hardware and algorithms in order to
bring closer the achievement of quantum advantage [3]. Those
earlier works, did not focus specifically on variational quantum
algorithms hence our work sheds new light on the need to align
and co-design quantum algorithms, circuits and hardware to
mitigate noise and enable optimal VQE performance.

Fig. 5. Ranking of parameterized circuits with different IBMQ noise models

The noise models used in this analysis where ibmqx2,
ibmq melbourne, ibmq vigo, ibmq valencia, ibmq armonk,
ibmq athens, ibmq santiago. We represent the energy difference on the y-axis and the different noise models on the x-axis.
The results, as seen in Fig. 5, demonstrate that the ranking
of the circuits varies with the different quantum device noise
models, even within the same IBM Quantum hardware family.
For example, the noise models ibmqx2 and ibmq santiago give
completely different circuit orderings. All circuits perform best
with the ibmq armonk noise model, something that is due
to the level of noise and type of architecture. We note that
the circuit that appears to perform consistently well across all
noise models is circuit 2 (RY CZ), see also [7]. The circuit
that performs the worst across all noise models is circuit 10
(HRX CZ).

C. Limitation of the expressibility measure
We investigated the expressibility measure for parameterized quantum circuits. We first examined the effect of noise
on the expressibility measure, and then we examined how
good an indicator is expressibility for the performance of a
parameterized circuit family within a VQE algorithm.
To our knowledge this is the first study to explore the performance of the expressibility measure under noisy quantum
conditions using IBM Quantum simulators. The expressibility

7

estimated for the circuits in Appendix under noise-free conditions (Table III), show a disagreement with the expressibility
results computed under noisy conditions (Table IV). This
finding demonstrates, that noise affects the expressibility of
different parameterized circuit families in different way. This
observation is especially relevant since studies such as [11],
[12] base the decision of the ansatz to use on the classically
simulated results of a set of circuits studied in the expressibility paper [8], without delving in the robustness of this measure
in real noisy setting.
We then examine the suitability of the expressibility measure for choosing the optimal ansatz family within VQE.
We compared the performance of each ansatz family by
expressibility and by its performance on estimating the ground
state of H2 using VQE, both for ideal and noisy quantum
simulations. We computed the Pearson correlation coefficient
and generated scatter plot diagrams to analyze the strength
of the relationship between the estimated expressibility and
the performance of the family in VQE. The analysis clearly
shows that there is no strong correlation between the two
metrics, and thus expressibility (for ideal or noisy devices) is
not a good indicator for the performance of an ansatz family.
These findings are in consensus with a recent study that found
ansatze with high expressibility, exhibit reduced trainability as
a result of flat cost landscapes [27]. Finally, as a side result,
we noted that the expressibility metric of an ansatz family can
be improved by using non-uniform parameter sampling.
Moreover, we note that the proposed framework to estimate
expressibility, is not simple to reproduce and is computationally expensive to use for each circuit on noisy quantum simulators. The authors note that alternative quantities and numerical
methods may be used to estimate expressibility. However, in
view of our findings on the relation of expressibility with
the VQE performance, we suggest that alternative methods
to choose the suitable ansatz family should be considered.

depth, reduce noise-induced barren plateaus and perform well
on quantum chemistry problems applied to noisy quantum
hardware [7], [32]. Many hardware efficient ansatz exist,
however their performance is affected differently by noise.
Hence in this study we are concerned with the effect of noise
on the decision of which ansatz family is best for a quantum
chemistry problem.
In this study, we explored twelve hardware efficient circuit
structures that consist of three main circuit designs that employ
different types and configurations of the CX and CZ two-qubit
gates. The circuit structures are restricted to a circuit depth of
one and circuit width of four qubits. We confined this study to
evaluate the VQE algorithm for a single well known quantum
chemistry problem, namely to simulate the ground state energy
of the hydrogen molecule. Since part of the aim of this project
was to evaluate the usefulness of the expressibility measure for
VQE, we focused solely on hardware efficient ansatze1 .
To study the effect of noise on the different hardware
efficient ansatze, we benchmarked and ranked the performance
of each ansatz family by expressibility as well as by its
performance on accurately finding the ground state of H2 using
VQE. Our simulations demonstrate that the ranking of the
optimal circuits varies with the noise level and noise type of
the hardware. Hence testing circuit families on noisy quantum
simulators or actual quantum devices leads to a more accurate
decision on the optimal ansatz to choose.
Finally we examined the expressibility measure for characterizing ansatz families of quantum circuits. We saw that
noise affects the expressibility of different families in different
degrees, while the expressibility of a family could be improved
by non-uniform sampling. Interestingly, we noticed that the
expressibility did not correlate with the performance of the
corresponding circuit for finding hydrogen’s ground state
using VQE. This indicates, that expressibility is not a good
choice for selecting the suitable ansatz family within VQE for
chemistry applications.
Our work directly invites two directions for further explorations. Firstly one needs to do a more extensive analysis that
would include more types of ansatze, both in terms of gates
used, but also in terms of size (width and depth of circuit),
and more types of noise. Secondly one can attempt to use
machine learning techniques to train a classifier that would
predict the suitable ansatz given certain characteristics/features
of the problem addressed and hardware used (noise model).

VII. C ONCLUSION
Variational quantum algorithms appear the most promising
approach for existing noisy quantum devices. To approximate the ground state energy of small molecules on existing
quantum computers specifically one could use the variational
quantum eigensolver method. An important aspect that could
improve the performance of the VQE algorithm in practice, is
the correct selection of ansatz family. In the pursuit of quantum
advantage, many research studies have developed new and
dynamic ansatz to optimize the VQE algorithm, in terms of
accuracy and scalability, for existing quantum devices [28]–
[31]. Many of these exciting developments are chemically
or theoretically motivated but have little consideration of
the impact of quantum device noise on the performance.
Since quantum device noise is one of the main impediments
to achieve quantum advantage in general but for the VQE
algorithm [11] in particular, there is a need to understand
the exact effect of noise on the performance and ranking of
parameterized quantum circuits. We focus on the hardware
efficient ansatz that can be used to minimize the circuit

A PPENDIX
A subset of parameterized quantum circuits explored in this
study are hardware efficient ansatz with parameterized gates
Rx,Ry and Rz. The number of qubits or circuit width and the
circuits layers or depth are kept constant with a circuit width at
four and depth at one. The circuits are labelled with numbers
for ease of reference

1 Problem specific circuits such as the coupled cluster, typically do not
exhibit high expressibility.

8

Fig. 6. Circuit 1

Fig. 7. Circuit 2

Fig. 8. Circuit 3

Fig. 9. Circuit 4

9

Fig. 10. Circuit 5

Fig. 11. Circuit 6

Fig. 12. Circuit 7

Fig. 13. Circuit 8

10

Fig. 14. Circuit 9

Fig. 15. Circuit 10

Fig. 16. Circuit 11

Fig. 17. Circuit 12

11

TABLE III
R ANKING OF ANSATZE BY EXPRESSIBILITY ON IDEAL QUANTUM
SIMULATOR

Circuit
12
11
6
5
7
1
2
3
4
8
9
10

Gates
CX
CZ
CZ,CX,CZ,CX
CX,CX,CZ,CZ
CZ,CX,CX,CZ
CX
CZ
CX,CZ,CX,CZ
CX,CZ,CZ,CX
CZ,CZ,CX,CX
CX
CZ

Expressibility
0.020
0.027
0.202
0.205
0.224
0.224
0.226
0.229
0.234
0.240
0.648
0.691

TABLE IV
R ANKING OF ANSATZE BY EXPRESSIBILITY ON NOISY QUANTUM
SIMULATOR

Circuit
2
1
4
3
8
7
9
5
6
12
11
10

Gates
CZ
CX
CX,CZ,CZ,CX
CX,CZ,CX,CZ
CZ,CZ,CX,CX
CZ,CX,CX,CZ
CX
CX,CX,CZ,CZ
CZ,CX,CZ,CX
CX
CZ
CZ

Noise Model
ibmqx2
ibmqx2
ibmqx2
ibmqx2
ibmqx2
ibmqx2
ibmqx2
ibmqx2
ibmqx2
ibmqx2
ibmqx2
ibmqx2

Expressibility
0.673
0.698
0.715
0.731
0.747
0.832
0.835
0.885
0.899
0.946
1.459
2.668

12

R EFERENCES

[21] M. Cerezo, Ryan Babbush, Simon Benjamin, Suguru Endo, Keisuke
Fujii, Jarrod Mcclean, Xiao Yuan, Lukasz Cincio, and Patrick Coles.
Variational quantum algorithms. 12 2020.
[22] Diana Mindrila and Phoebe Balentyne. Scatterplots and correlation.
Retrieved from, 2017.
[23] Wes McKinney et al. pandas: a foundational python library for data
analysis and statistics. Python for High Performance and Scientific
Computing, 14(9), 2011.
[24] Frank Leymann and Johanna Barzen. The bitter truth about gate-based
quantum algorithms in the nisq era. Quantum Science and Technology,
5(4):044007, 2020.
[25] Philip Krantz, Morten Kjaergaard, Fei Yan, Terry P Orlando, Simon
Gustavsson, and William D Oliver. A quantum engineer’s guide to
superconducting qubits. Applied Physics Reviews, 6(2):021318, 2019.
[26] Eric W Weisstein. Heaviside step function. https://mathworld. wolfram.
com/, 2002.
[27] Zoë Holmes, Kunal Sharma, M Cerezo, and Patrick J Coles. Connecting
ansatz expressibility to gradient magnitudes and barren plateaus. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2101.02138, 2021.
[28] Mateusz Ostaszewski, Edward Grant, and Marcello Benedetti. Quantum
circuit structure learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.09692, 2019.
[29] Harper R Grimsley, Sophia E Economou, Edwin Barnes, and Nicholas J
Mayhall. An adaptive variational algorithm for exact molecular simulations on a quantum computer. Nature communications, 10(1):1–9, 2019.
[30] Pierre-Luc Dallaire-Demers, Jonathan Romero, Libor Veis, Sukin Sim,
and Alán Aspuru-Guzik. Low-depth circuit ansatz for preparing correlated fermionic states on a quantum computer. Quantum Science and
Technology, 4(4):045005, 2019.
[31] Alexandre Choquette, Agustin Di Paolo, Panagiotis Kl Barkoutsos,
David Sénéchal, Ivano Tavernelli, and Alexandre Blais. Quantumoptimal-control-inspired ansatz for variational quantum algorithms.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2008.01098, 2020.
[32] Samson Wang, Enrico Fontana, Marco Cerezo, Kunal Sharma, Akira
Sone, Lukasz Cincio, and Patrick J Coles. Noise-induced barren plateaus
in variational quantum algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.14384,
2020.

[1] Richard P Feynman. Simulating physics with computers. International
Journal of Theoretical Physics, 21(6/7), 1981.
[2] Sam McArdle, Suguru Endo, Alan Aspuru-Guzik, Simon C Benjamin,
and Xiao Yuan. Quantum computational chemistry. Reviews of Modern
Physics, 92(1):015003, 2020.
[3] Nikolaj Moll, Panagiotis Barkoutsos, Lev S Bishop, Jerry M Chow,
Andrew Cross, Daniel J Egger, Stefan Filipp, Andreas Fuhrer, Jay M
Gambetta, Marc Ganzhorn, et al. Quantum optimization using variational algorithms on near-term quantum devices. Quantum Science and
Technology, 3(3):030503, 2018.
[4] John Preskill. Quantum computing in the nisq era and beyond. Quantum,
2:79, 2018.
[5] Alberto Peruzzo, Jarrod McClean, Peter Shadbolt, Man-Hong Yung,
Xiao-Qi Zhou, Peter J Love, Alán Aspuru-Guzik, and Jeremy L O’brien.
A variational eigenvalue solver on a photonic quantum processor. Nature
communications, 5:4213, 2014.
[6] Jarrod R McClean, Jonathan Romero, Ryan Babbush, and Alán AspuruGuzik. The theory of variational hybrid quantum-classical algorithms.
New Journal of Physics, 18(2):023023, 2016.
[7] Abhinav Kandala, Antonio Mezzacapo, Kristan Temme, Maika Takita,
Markus Brink, Jerry M Chow, and Jay M Gambetta. Hardware-efficient
variational quantum eigensolver for small molecules and quantum magnets. Nature, 549(7671):242–246, 2017.
[8] Sukin Sim, Peter D Johnson, and Alán Aspuru-Guzik. Expressibility
and entangling capability of parameterized quantum circuits for hybrid quantum-classical algorithms. Advanced Quantum Technologies,
2(12):1900070, 2019.
[9] Thomas Hubregtsen, Josef Pichlmeier, Patrick Stecher, and Koen Bertels.
Evaluation of parameterized quantum circuits: on the relation between
classification accuracy, expressibility and entangling capability. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2003.09887, 2020.
[10] Kouhei Nakaji and Naoki Yamamoto.
Expressibility of the alternating layered ansatz for quantum computation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2005.12537, 2020.
[11] Jinfeng Zeng, Zipeng Wu, Chenfeng Cao, Chao Zhang, Shiyao Hou,
Pengxiang Xu, and Bei Zeng. Simulating noisy variational quantum
eigensolver with local noise models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.14821,
2020.
[12] Enrico Fontana, Nathan Fitzpatrick, David Muños Ramo, Ross Duncan,
and Ivan Rungger. Evaluating the noise resilience of variational quantum
algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.01125, 2020.
[13] Yudong Cao, Jonathan Romero, Jonathan P Olson, Matthias Degroote,
Peter D Johnson, Mária Kieferová, Ian D Kivlichan, Tim Menke, Borja
Peropadre, Nicolas PD Sawaya, et al. Quantum chemistry in the age of
quantum computing. Chemical reviews, 119(19):10856–10915, 2019.
[14] Vojtěch Havlı́ček, Antonio D Córcoles, Kristan Temme, Aram W Harrow, Abhinav Kandala, Jerry M Chow, and Jay M Gambetta. Supervised
learning with quantum-enhanced feature spaces. Nature, 567(7747):209–
212, 2019.
[15] Karol Życzkowski and Hans-Jürgen Sommers. Average fidelity between
random quantum states. Physical Review A, 71(3):032313, 2005.
[16] Solomon Kullback and Richard A Leibler. On information and sufficiency. The annals of mathematical statistics, 22(1):79–86, 1951.
[17] Christopher J Wood. Special session: Noise characterization and error
mitigation in near-term quantum computers. In 2020 IEEE 38th
International Conference on Computer Design (ICCD), pages 13–16.
IEEE, 2020.
[18] Gadi Aleksandrowicz, Thomas Alexander, Panagiotis Barkoutsos, Luciano Bello, Yael Ben-Haim, D Bucher, FJ Cabrera-Hernández,
J Carballo-Franquis, A Chen, CF Chen, et al. Qiskit: An open-source
framework for quantum computing. Accessed on: Mar, 16, 2019.
[19] Alexander J McCaskey, Zachary P Parks, Jacek Jakowski, Shirley V
Moore, Titus D Morris, Travis S Humble, and Raphael C Pooser.
Quantum chemistry as a benchmark for near-term quantum computers.
npj Quantum Information, 5(1):1–8, 2019.
[20] Qiming Sun, Timothy C Berkelbach, Nick S Blunt, George H Booth,
Sheng Guo, Zhendong Li, Junzi Liu, James D McClain, Elvira R Sayfutyarova, Sandeep Sharma, et al. Pyscf: the python-based simulations of
chemistry framework. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Computational
Molecular Science, 8(1):e1340, 2018.

13

