Low depth amplitude estimation on a trapped ion quantum computer
Tudor Giurgica-Tiron,1, 2 Sonika Johri,3 Iordanis Kerenidis,4, 5 Jason Nguyen,3 Neal
Pisenti,3 Anupam Prakash,4 Ksenia Sosnova,3 Ken Wright,3 and William Zeng1
1
Goldman, Sachs & Co.
Stanford University, Palo Alto, CA.
3
IonQ Inc, 4505 Campus Dr, College Park, MD 20740
4
QC Ware, Palo Alto, USA and Paris, France
5
IRIF, CNRS - University of Paris, France
(Dated: September 21, 2021)

arXiv:2109.09685v1 [quant-ph] 20 Sep 2021

2

Amplitude estimation is a fundamental quantum algorithmic primitive that enables quantum
computers to achieve quadratic speedups for a large class of statistical estimation problems, including Monte Carlo methods. The main drawback from the perspective of near term hardware
implementations is that the amplitude estimation algorithm requires very deep quantum circuits.
Recent works have succeeded in somewhat reducing the necessary resources for such algorithms, by
trading off some of the speedup for lower depth circuits, but high quality qubits are still needed for
demonstrating such algorithms.
Here, we report the results of an experimental demonstration of amplitude estimation on a state-ofthe-art trapped ion quantum computer. The amplitude estimation algorithms were used to estimate
the inner product of randomly chosen four-dimensional unit vectors, and were based on the maximum
likelihood estimation (MLE) and the Chinese remainder theorem (CRT) techniques. Significant
improvements in accuracy were observed for the MLE based approach when deeper quantum circuits
were taken into account, including circuits with more than ninety two-qubit gates and depth sixty,
achieving a mean additive estimation error on the order of 10−2 . The CRT based approach was
found to provide accurate estimates for many of the data points but was less robust against noise
on average. Last, we analyze two more amplitude estimation algorithms that take into account the
specifics of the hardware noise to further improve the results.

I.

INTRODUCTION

Amplitude estimation [5] is a fundamental quantum algorithmic primitive that enables quantum computers to
achieve quadratic speedups for a large class of statistical
estimation problems. Amplitude estimation is of particular interest for quantum algorithms in computational
finance as it underlies the quantum speedup for Monte
Carlo methods [24].
In a typical setting for quantum Monte Carlo methods, the quantum algorithm has access to an evaluation
oracle for a function f : X → R and the goal is to estimate the mean value of f to additive error . Montanaro
[24] gave an algorithm to estimate the mean for arbitrary
distributions on X in the setting where the variance of
f is upper bounded by σ. It requires O(σ/) calls to
the oracle for f , achieving a quadratic speedup over classical algorithms that require O(σ 2 /2 ) calls. Quantum
Monte Carlo methods have also been developed for settings where the distribution on X is uniform [2, 4, 11] and
for settings with known bounds on the mean [12, 20].
The main drawback of quantum Monte Carlo methods from the perspective of near term hardware implementations is that the amplitude estimation algorithm
requires the evaluation oracle for f to be invoked sequentially O(σ/) times. The depth of the quantum circuit for Monte Carlo is therefore O(σD(f )/) where D(f )
is the depth of the evaluation oracle. Reducing the resource requirements for quantum Monte Carlo methods
to bring them closer to implementation on noisy interme-

diate scale quantum (NISQ) architectures has been the
focus of a number of recent works.
The first results on reducing resource requirements for
amplitude estimation were given by Suzuki et al. [31]
who used maximum likelihood estimation with exponential schedules to eliminate the quantum Fourier transform (QFT) step in the amplitude estimation algorithm.
Aaronson and Rall [1] gave a QFT free algorithm with
rigorous guarantees and further work by Grinko et al.
[10] on iterative AE reduced the constant overheads for
the QFT free amplitude estimation. Eliminating the
QFT does not lower significantly the depth of the AE
algorithm as the QFT circuit has depth O(log log(1/)),
but it is an important step towards making amplitude
estimation nearer term. The QFT free algorithms do not
need to apply controlled versions of the oracle.
A different line of research, aimed at reducing the
depth for AE algorithms while still retaining a partial
speedup, was initiated in [9] where AE algorithms with
depth O(1/1−β ) and O(1/1+β ) queries were proposed
and analyzed. These algorithms interpolate between classical sampling and the standard AE algorithms and are
based on maximum likelihood estimation with power law
schedules and boosting AE estimates using the Chinese
remainder theorem. Similar tradeoffs for the special case
of approximate counting were obtained by Burchard [6]
with supporting results from the lower bound literature
indicating the optimality of the tradeoff [14, 35]. Tanaka
et al. [32] studied amplitude estimation in the presence
of depolarizing noise and gave evidence that super linear

2
power law schedules can be robust against noise. More
recent work has proposed a Fourier series decomposition
to reduce the amplitude estimation depth [13] and a variational approach to near term term amplitude estimation
[25].
Applications of quantum Monte Carlo methods to
problems in computational finance has been the focus of
several recent works. These works explore the application
of quantum Monte Carlo to specific financial problems
like pricing simple options and credit risk calculations
[8, 22, 28, 29, 34]. Some of these works have an experimental component, for example [29, 34] report proof-ofconcept results of running their models on three and four
qubit quantum devices. Experimental results are limited
both by the number of qubits available and the circuit
depth of the amplitude estimation procedure, so a quantum advantage over classical Monte Carlo methods has
not been established so far due to hardware limitations.
The costs for implementing the amplitude estimation oracle for these applications are significant. Therefore, some
works have focused on resource estimation [7, 29] while
others have tried to reduce the cost of implementing the
oracles for financial applications [17, 23, 26, 33].
Experiments on near term amplitude estimation using the iterative AE [10] and MLE based approaches [31]
for two and three qubits were recently carried out on
the IBM quantum computers [27]. Amplitude estimation was used for Monte Carlo estimation of the integral
R π/2 2
sin (x)dx. The main evaluation oracle circuit con0
sisted of three qubits and two two-qubit gates, the maximum depth that was demonstrated was two, and the
hardware noise led to significant loss of performance for
the AE algorithm compared to simulator runs. The additive error for estimating the integral was also fairly large
compared to the magnitude of the integral, thus attesting
to the limitations of the hardware.
Noise aware approaches to amplitude estimation that
consider a Gaussian noise model instead of the depolarizing channel and adapt the AE algorithm to the noise have
been proposed very recently [30]. Experimental results
on the Honeywell quantum hardware show that incorporating information about the noise can improve performance of the AE algorithms.
In this paper, we report the results of experiments
demonstrating the low depth AE algorithms from [9] on
IonQ’s state-of-the-art trapped ion quantum computer.
We compare the AE performance against sampling directly from the evaluation oracle. A successful demonstration shows that AE has less estimation error for the
same number of samples. On a noiseless quantum computer the advantage from the AE approach would be
quadratic in the depth of the quantum algorithm run.
As current hardware has noise, we expect to see the AE
advantage increase to some maximum depth after which
noise from longer circuits overwhelms the quantum scaling advantage. This demonstration on IonQ hardware
(Fig. 5) is the main result of this work.
Note that this is a proof-of-concept demonstration of

the scaling advantage of AE. This is because the classical sampling comparison we use still uses the evaluation
oracle on the QPU. To show practical quantum advantage, the quantum AE approach would need to best classical sampling with classical processors that today have a
much higher clock speed and negligible error rates compared to QPUs. Significant improvements in QPU performance will be needed before this demonstration of practical advantage.
Here, amplitude estimation is used to provide more accurate estimates of the inner product between randomly
chosen four-dimensional vectors. The circuits for inner
product estimation have been developed using quantum
data loaders, which are logarithmic depth quantum circuits for creating vector states. The data loaders were
introduced in [15], where they were used for state preparation for quantum nearest centroid classification of the
MNIST dataset, and have also being used for loading
data in quantum neural networks [19, 21]. The inner
product estimation circuits, used as the evaluation oracle for amplitude estimation, when compiled down to
two-qubit gates that can be directly applied on the hardware, are circuits on four qubits that use eight two-qubit
gates and have depth six.
The amplitude estimation algorithm executes these oracles in sequence a number of times in order to get more
accurate estimates of the inner product. The high gate
fidelity for the trapped ion quantum computer allow us
to report experimental results for considerably deep amplitude estimation circuits, where the oracle circuit is repeated sequentially up to fifteen times for a total depth
of more than sixty and a total number of two-qubit gates
of more than ninety.
We use two different low-depth amplitude estimation
algorithms, one based on a maximum likelihood estimation (MLE) applied on the results of different depth circuits, and the second is an adaptation of the QoPrime
algorithm from [9], where quantum circuits for two coprime depths are run.
The main figure of merit of whether the amplitude estimation algorithms have been demonstrated in practice is
whether the accuracy of the estimation when using samples from higher depth quantum circuits (i.e. applying
the evaluation oracle sequentially many times) is better
than the accuracy achieved when one only uses samples
from the evaluation oracle directly. Note that there is
a level of noise in the circuits which has some interesting consequences: first, samples beyond a certain depth
are going to be ineffective at improving further the accuracy, since they become too noisy; and second, even for
sampling from the evaluation oracle directly, a certain
approximation error will remain no matter if we increase
the number of samples. We explain these effects in more
detail in the following sections.
Let us provide some high level description of the results
of the demonstration. The results of the MLE based AE
with higher depths demonstrate significant improvements
in the accuracy compared to using a large number of sam-

3
ples from the evaluation oracle. Here we use a simple linear schedule, thus considering circuits of 2t + 1 sequential
oracle calls for t all possible integers up to 7. These results constitute a proof-of concept demonstration of MLE
based amplitude estimation on real quantum hardware.
We note that for such small depths it does not make much
sense to consider the more involved power law schedules
based AE as described in [9], which will start providing
better tradeoffs between the total number of oracle calls
and the circuit depth as the hardware continues to evolve.
Compared to the MLE based approach, the QoPrime
AE algorithm, based on the Chinese remainder theorem,
is less robust to noise, though it has a rigorous proof
of correctness. We report experimental results for CRT
based algorithms where the moduli are chosen to be consecutive odd numbers. The results on CRT based AE
show convergence for the pair of moduli (3,5), for other
pairs of moduli the algorithm converges on a large fraction the data points but not on all. The reason behind
this performance is that the theoretical analysis of the
CRT algorithm assumes that the sampling probabilities
behave like independent coin flips and applies Chernoff
bounds to bound the resulting errors. However, in practice, the errors on consecutive shots may be correlated.
This results in some of the data points having inaccurate estimates, leading to higher average errors for the
CRT based algorithm. Nevertheless, the CRT based algorithm in the noiseless case is more accurate than the
MLE algorithm, and, therefore, it has the potential to be
competitive with the MLE based approach with further
improvements in hardware fidelity and calibration.
Last, we analyze two more algorithms that take advantage of knowledge of the noise present in the hardware.
This information may come from the calibration of the
hardware directly or better by running the algorithms on
some training data beforehand, calculating the appropriate hyper parameters for the specific hardware, and then
running the amplitude estimation algorithms on the desired inputs with those hyper parameters. The first algorithm is a hybrid algorithm that chooses between an MLE
based estimate for very small depths and a CRT based
estimate for two large moduli, and whose test condition
is tuned experimentally. The second such algorithm is
an MLE based amplitude estimation algorithm with a
power law schedule, as defined in [9], where the exponent
is tuned experimentally.
In the following sections, we describe in detail the amplitude estimation algorithms and circuits and provide an
analysis of the results of the experimental demonstration
of the different AE algorithms.

II.

THE AMPLITUDE ESTIMATION
ALGORITHM AND CIRCUITS

We consider an amplitude estimation setting where the
algorithm is given access to a quantum circuit A such
that A |0k i = sin(θ) |1, xi + cos(θ) |0, x0 i where |xi , |x0 i

are arbitrary states on (k − 1) qubits. The algorithm’s
goal is to estimate the angle θ within an additive factor
. We call A the evaluation oracle.
The iteration circuit consists of the following four unitaries AS0 A† Sχ , where the reflection Sχ puts a minus
phase in front of the states |1i |xi and S0 = 2 |0n i h0n |−I
is a reflection around the all-zero state.
The low-depth quantum amplitude estimation algorithm executes a number of different circuits U t , for different depths t, where we define these circuits as
U t = (AS0 A† Sχ )t A

(1)

In other words, the depth 0 circuit is a simple application of the evaluation oracle A, while for a depth t we
add t applications of the iteration circuit to an initial
application of the oracle. Thus, for depth t the number
of oracle calls is (2t + 1) and the state at the end of the
circuit U t is
U t |0i = sin((2t + 1)θ) |1, xi + cos((2t + 1)θ) |0, x0 i
We now describe the evaluation oracle that will be used
as our amplitude estimation benchmark. We use a simple circuit for estimating the square inner product between two random unit vectors that are encoded with a
unary amplitude encoding method. Such circuits have
been used before for estimating the Euclidean distance
between data points in [15]. In Figure 4 we see the inner
product estimation circuit for 4-dimensional vectors that
uses four qubits and four RBS gates (denoted as B-S in
the circuit).

FIG. 1: The inner product estimation oracle for
4-dimensional inputs. It consists of an initial X gate
and four RBS gates whose parameters depend on the
input vectors.
An RBS(φ) gate is a two qubit gate defined as


1
0
0 0
 0 cos φ sin φ 0 
RBS(φ) = 
0 − sin φ cos φ 0 
0
0
0 1

(2)

Note also that RBS † (θ) = RBS(−θ).
Given two unit vectors x and y, one can find angles
φ for the four RBS gates in the circuit so that the final
state at the end of the quantum circuit is of the form
x · y |e1 i + |Gi

(3)

4
where |Gi is an unnormalised unary state orthogonal to
e1 , in other words whose first qubit is in state |0i. This
implies that when we measure the first qubit of this quantum state, the probability we get outcome 1 is exactly
(x · y)2 , while the outcome is 0 with the remaining probability 1 − (x · y)2 . In order to match the notation for
the amplitude estimation algorithm, one can rewrite the
above state as
sin θ |1i |000i + cos θ |0i |000⊥ i

(4)

for θ such that sin θ = x · y. Hence, we can use this inner
product estimation circuits as the evaluation oracle for
an amplitude estimation implementation. We see that
in total the evaluation oracle consists of four RBS gates
with a circuit depth of three. Here we focus on the number and depth of the two-qubit gates, since single-qubit
gates are much faster and easier to implement.

works [3, 18, 21]. They also provide a great benchmark
for the AE algorithms, since one can easily increase the
complexity of the oracle by increasing the dimension of
the unit vectors. For example, using 8-dimensional vectors increases the complexity of the evaluation oracle to a
circuit with eight qubits, ten RBS gates and depth five.
We will now see how to optimize the circuits of the
amplitude estimation before moving to the real hardware
implementation. First, we define the operators in the
iteration circuit. For implementing A† , one only needs to
invert the circuit and negate the angles of the RBS gates.
The fact of using a unary encoding also greatly simplifies
the implementation of the two reflections, in fact it is
easy to see that the reflections both simplify to adding a
single Z gate on the first qubit between applications of
the oracle and its adjoint.
The last optimization of the circuit is to notice that two
RBS gates with a Z gate between them can be simplified
to only one RBS gate and one Z gate, by changing the
angle parameter of the RBS gate. This simplification
happens in all applications of the oracle apart from the
last one. Thus, the final circuits we implement appear in
Figure 2, where we show the circuits for depth 1,2, and
3. Note that we implemented circuits up to depth 8.
Last, we use the decomposition of the RBS gate into
single-qubit gates and two CZ gates as in Figure 3 [21] in
order to implement it efficiently with the two-qubit gates
available on the IonQ platform.

FIG. 3: A decomposition of the RBS(θ) using
Hadadard gates H, two single qubit rotations Ry and
two two-qubit CZgates.
Hence, for the circuit U t , the number of two-qubit
gates implemented on the hardware are (12t + 8) for a
circuit depth of (8t + 6).
III.

FIG. 2: The circuits U t , for depth t = 1, 2, 3. The
hardware implementation consisted of circuits up to
t = 7, with a total of ninety two two-qubit gates and a
circuit depth of sixty two.
We remark here that one could use many different evaluation oracle circuits in order to test the amplitude estimation algorithms. The inner product estimation circuits used in the experiments as the evaluation oracle are
known to be optimal both with respect to the number of
gates and circuit depth and they have a number of different applications in estimating the Euclidean distance
between data points in similarity-based classification algorithms [15] or for assisting in the training of neural net-

EXPERIMENTAL APPARATUS

The experimental demonstration was performed on the
newest generation IonQ quantum processing unit (QPU).
This system, as in previous IonQ QPUs [16], utilizes
trapped Ytterbium ions where two states in the ground
hyperfine manifold are used as qubit states. These states
are manipulated by illuminating individual ions with
pulses of 355 nm light that drive Raman transitions between the ground states defining the qubit. By configuring these pulses, arbitrary single qubit gates and MolmerSorenson type two-qubit gates can both be realized. This
QPU features not only an order of magnitude better performance in terms of fidelity but also is considerably more
robust compared to its current QPU on the cloud. This
allows for deep circuits with many shots to be run over

5
a very reasonable period of time. This increased data
collection rate has made it possible to run experiments
of this nature.

FIG. 4: Schematic of next generation IonQ hardware,
where two fans of individually addressable beams
illuminate a chain of individually imaged ions.

IV.

MAXIMUM LIKELIHOOD ESTIMATION
BASED AMPLITUDE ESTIMATION

The maximum likelihood estimation (MLE) based Amplitude Estimation (AE) algorithms combine information
from samples taken from quantum circuits of the form
U t = (AS0 A† Sχ )t A at different depths t in a statistically efficient manner, in order to provide an accurate
estimate of the parameter θ of the evaluation oracle A,
where A |0k i = sin(θ) |1, xi + cos(θ) |0, x0 i. An MLE
based algorithm is specified by a schedule of measurements (t, Nt ) where Nt is the number of measurements
made at depth t. A uniform (or more generally a beta
distributed) prior on the success probabilities is updated
according to the maximum likelihood rule applied to the
results of the measurements for the different depth circuits. Different schedules for MLE based AE algorithms
yield different tradeoffs between the number of oracle
calls and the accuracy of the algorithm, the tradeoff can
be analyzed using the notion of Fisher information of
the schedule. Suzuki et. al [31] proposed exponential
schedules (2t , Nshot ) where samples are taken at depths
that are multiples of powers of 2 ranging from 1 up to
2log(1/) and showed that such exponential schedules can
be used for amplitude estimation without the need of a
Quantum Fourier Transform. Linear and super polynomial schedules (tα , Nshot ) for α > 1 have been proposed
[31, 32] along with analysis supporting the robustness of
these schedules against depolarizing noise. More generally, power law schedules (tα , Nshot ) for α > 0 were proposed in [9] with optimal tradeoffs between circuit depth
and total number of oracle calls.
Let us now describe the schedules we used in the experiments. First, we used linear schedules, since for small
depths they provide a good and simple alternative. Furthermore, for MLE based AE algorithms in a setting with
depolarizing noise, it is known that the accuracy of the
estimation improves only up to a certain depth, depend-

ing on the noise rate [9, 32]. Taking further samples at
greater depths actually degrades the performance of the
algorithm since it basically adds more noise to the estimate. Thus, taking advantage of the high fidelities of
the state-of-the-art IonQ quantum computer we managed
to run the amplitude estimation algorithm with depths
ranging from zero to seven, where the circuit U 7 has
ninety two two-qubit gates and a depth of sixty two, and
keeping the additive error for the estimate very small, in
fact below 0.02. The schedules used 500 shots per depth.
In addition, efficient error mitigation was performed in
the measurement results as in [15] by taking advantage
of the unary encoding.
The overall algorithm used is presented in IV.1, it is an
MLE based AE algorithm with a linear schedule (t, 500)
with maximum depth equal to seven and parameter  =
0.001. The algorithm uses 1/ = 1000 buckets for the
MLE estimation,  is a lower bound on the accuracy for
the algorithm. The evaluation oracle used was an inner
product estimation circuit for 4-dimensional unit vectors.
The goal for the experiments was to establish an advantage for MLE based AE implementation in a noisy
setting, that is to show that this family of algorithms can
achieve more accurate estimates compared to the baseline of simply sampling from the evaluation oracle (the
circuits corresponding to U 0 ), which is akin to classical
sampling in the noiseless setting. In the noisy setting, the
mean accuracy for sampling from the evaluation oracle
saturates at some threshold determined by the noise rate,
and thus, an AE algorithm in the noisy setting achieves
an advantage if it can obtain more accurate estimates by
sampling from higher depth circuits.
The results for the MLE based AE algorithm are pre-

Algorithm IV.1 Maximum Likelihood Estimation
(MLE) based AE algorithm
Require: Parameter , maximum depth D and number
of shots Nshot .
Access to a unitary A such that
A |0i = sin(θ) |1i |000i + sin(θ) |0i |000⊥ i and to U d =
(AS0 A† Sχ )d A for d ∈ [D].
1: Initialize the prior to the uniform distribution on angles
θ = πk
for integer valued k ∈ [0, 1 ), i.e. p(θ) = 1 , ∀θ.
2
2: for t=1 to D do
3: Initialize Nd0 = Nd1 = 0, these variables record the 0 and
1 counts for the depth-d measurements.
4: for i=1 to Nshot do
5: Apply the unitary U d and measure the resulting quantum
state in the standard basis.
6: If the outcome is the state |1000i then Nd0 = Nd0 + 1,
else if the outcome is a different unary string then Nd1 =
Nd1 + 1, else do nothing.
7: end for
8: Perform Bayesian updates p(θ) → p(θ) cos((2d +
1)θ)Nd0 sin((2d + 1)θ)Nd1 and renormalize to obtain the
posterior probability distribution.
9: end for
10: Output θ with the highest probability according to the
posterior probability distribution.

6

FIG. 5: Comparison of MLE based AE algorithm vs.
simple averaging over samples from the evaluation
oracle, namely the inner product estimation circuit.
The mean error and error bars for MLE based AE are
shown with orange circles and for simple averaging over
many shots with blue triangles. The top figure
corresponds to the cloud based QPU and the bottom
figure to the next generation QPU with Nshot = 500.
The black lines are a guide to the eye. The x-axis
denotes the total oracle calls. For simple averaging,
N oracle = 1 for all points. The insets zoom in on the
error from simple averaging showing its convergence to
a constant value as the number of shots increases. For
convenience of averaging over several circuits at each
data point, the number of shots used is the total
number of shots taken for each experiment even though
a symmetry based postprocessing technique was utilized
which discards some of the shots.

sented in Figure 5.
The plot compares the results of estimating the angle
of the evaluation oracle when we only sample from the
evaluation oracle for different number of shots (blue line)
versus when we perform an MLE based AE algorithm
using a fixed number of shots for different circuit depths.

The results are averaged over a set of 50 randomly chosen
input vectors, 500 shots per circuit, and the mean and
standard deviation are shown. For the top plot, the IonQ
cloud-based QPU, while for the bottom plot, we used the
state-of-the-art next generation IonQ QPU.
The blue lines correspond to the classical case where in
a noiseless setting O(1/2 ) samples are needed to achieve
accuracy . Since each point is averaged over many circuits with the same structure but the same angle, depolarizing noise can be used for effective error model.
Then, given the fact that there effectively exists a level
of depolarizing noise even at the level of single oracle circuits, the error does not converge to zero but saturates
at a higher threshold, which in the experiments (and after the post-processing technique described in step 6 of
Algorithm IV.1) is about 0.073 for the cloud QPU and
0.053 for the next generation QPU.
The orange lines correspond to the MLE based AE algorithm which uses samples from different depths and
combines the estimates via an MLE calculation as in Algorithm IV.1). With the cloud-based QPU, we see that
the MLE based algorithm beats the simple algorithm of
sampling only from the evaluation oracle for depths up to
two. In fact, the minimum error achieved is about 0.048
for the MLE algorithm with maximum depth one, namely
three sequential oracle applications. As we increase the
depth further, samples are detrimental to the accuracy
and make the approximation error shoot up. This is due
to the effective depolarizing error that results from noise
in the QPU operations.
On the other hand, the results on the new next generation IonQ QPU show remarkable improvements, allowing
us to provide estimates with much smaller additive error
for much larger depth circuits. The minimum approximation error is 0.0138 and is achieved for depth six circuits.
The improved gate fidelity for the next generation system accounts for the stark differences in the two plots
and the improvement for the AE results.
Let us give some more details now about the depolarizing error model and relate it to the results of the
hardware demonstration. Let p = sin2 (θ) be the quantity being estimated by the AE algorithm. There are
two different sources of effective depolarizing noise for
this experiment. The combined readout and initial state
preparation error β is independent of the circuit depth.
The gate error αt is the probability of depolarizing noise
due to the loss of coherence for gates in the depth t evaluation. The combined effect of these errors is given as,
ηt = β + αt

(5)

The above equation approximates (1 − αt )(1 − β) by 1 −
αt − β, this is a good approximation in the regime when
αt , β are small. For the depth t experiment, the outcome
|0i is observed with probability, pt = pt (1 − ηt ) + ηt /2.
The difference between actual and estimated probability is given by,
|pt − pt | = ηt |1/2 − pt |

(6)

7
The above equation shows that the mean error for the
experiment is non zero, more precisely
R the mean error
can be computed as the integral ηt |1/2 − pt |dp over
the distribution from which the probabilities are sampled. This allows us to extrapolate the blue lines in Fig
5 and conclude that the mean error for sampling from
the evaluation oracle saturates and does not improve by
taking even more samples from the evaluation oracle.

V.

CHINESE REMAINDER THEOREM BASED
AMPLITUDE ESTIMATION ALGORITHMS

In this section, we look at a different type of low depth
AE algorithm that uses the Chinese Remainder Theorem
instead of MLE techniques to combine the samples at
different circuit depths. This algorithm, called QoPrime
has a rigorous proof of convergence and in the noiseless
case or in the case of depolarizing noise applied independently over the samples, needs fewer samples than the
MLE based algorithm with linear schedules and matches
the one with power law schedules [9].
For the experiment, we use a simplified variant of
the QoPrime algorithm that samples at two consecutive
depths to find low precision estimates for the amplitude
that are then combined using the Chinese remainder theorem to provide better estimates. Given the fact that
we choose two consecutive odd numbers as moduli, the
rounding and sign estimation procedures are also simplified compared to the general algorithm in [9], where here
we will use an MLE based estimate for very small depths
(up to depth two) as a way to find the correct sign.
Algorithm V.1 Chinese Remainder Theorem (CRT)
based AE algorithm.

FIG. 6: The green curves represent the true
probabilities for the data points and the blue curves
correspond to the MLE based estimates at depths 0 (top
left), 1 (top right), 6 (bottom left) and 7 (bottom right),
where the depth 6 provides the minimum mean error.

The orange line in Fig 5 corresponds to the MLE based
AE algorithm that cases achieves substantially better estimation accuracy compared to taking samples only from
the evaluation oracle for the next generation QPU experiments. As noisier samples at higher depths are taken into
account, the accuracy for the MLE based algorithm worsens for the cloud based QPU. The lower noise rates for
the next generation QPU enable the algorithm to avoid
this degradation in performance for up to circuits with
depth seven, that consist of more than ninety two-qubit
gates and two-qubit depth of more than sixty.
In Figure 6, we plot the curves for the actual probabilities (green) and the MLE estimates (blue) at depths
zero, one, six and seven, giving a global view of the results
produced by the MLE based AE algorithm. The minimum mean error as metric were were obtained for MLE
on circuits if depth up to six, the depth six circuits had
eighty two-qubit gates and depth fifty four. The results
can be viewed as a demonstration that MLE based AE
algorithms can achieve improvements in accuracy compared to sampling from the evaluation oracle for near
term quantum devices in a noisy setting.

Require: Accuracy parameter , maximum depth D and
number of shots Nshot . Access to a unitary A such
that A |0i = sin(θ) |1i |000i + sin(θ) |0i |000⊥ i and to
U t = (AS0 A† Sχ )t A for t ∈ [D].
1: Compute an MLE estimate p0 for the quantity sin2 (θ)
using Algorithm IV.1 with maximum depth equal to 2
√
and define angle θ0 = arcsin( p0 ).
2: Compute estimates pD and pD−1 of the quantities
sin2 ((2D + 1)θ) and sin2 ((2D − 1)θ) by using samples
from the circuits U D and U D−1 respectively.
√
2(2D−1)
3: Compute l
=
=
arcsin( pD ) and h
π
√
2(2D+1)
arcsin( pD−1 ).
π
4: Compute s1 = sgn(sin(2(2D − 1))θ 0 ) and s2 =
sgn(sin(2(2D + 1))θ0 ).
5: Compute integers vt mod (4D 2 − 1) for 1 ≤ t ≤ 4
such that vt mod (2D − 1) = bs1.lc + (t mod 2) and vt
mod (2D + 1) = bs2.hc + t/2 using the Chinese remainder
theorem.
6: Out of the 4 values computed in step 4, select vt minimizing | sin2 ( 4Dvt2π−1 ) − p0 |.
7: Output the value 4Dvt2π−1 as estimate for the angle θ.

The main idea for the CRT based AE Algorithm V.1
is that if estimates obtained from running the evaluation
oracle at depths D and D − 1 are sufficiently accurate,
then they can be combined to get a higher accuracy estimate using the Chinese remainder theorem. The depth
D and D − 1 estimates are determined up to an ambiguity in sign which are resolved using an approximation
to the true success probability obtained with a depth 2
MLE estimate. The CRT based AE Algorithm V.1 requires fewer oracle calls than the MLE algorithm as it
considers samples only at depths 0, 1, 2 and at D, D − 1.
Figure 7 shows the results of Algorithm V.1 with the

8
inner product estimation circuit as the evaluation oracle on the IonQ next generation QPU for depths ranging
from one to seven. As we said, here the CRT based algorithm of depth D takes samples only from circuits of
depths D and D − 1, while it also uses an MLE-based
algorithm for depth two to differentiate the signs of the
estimates. Note as well that the cloud QPU was not able
to show that this algorithm improves the approximation
error with respect to sampling directly from the evaluation oracle, and the next generation QPU was necessary
to show such an improvement.
In Figure 7, the green curve represents the error
if the exact success probabilities sin2 ((2D − 1)θ) and
sin2 ((2D + 1)θ) are used instead of the estimated probabilities in step 2 of the CRT algorithm. Using the exact
success probabilities instead of the estimates obtained
from depth D and D − 1 runs of the oracle corresponds
to the accuracy of the Algorithm V.1 for a noiseless setting where the number of shots is large enough to ensure
convergence to the true success probabilities. The red
curve represents the accuracy of the CRT algorithm V.1.
This achieves a minimum mean error of 0.024 at depth
three. The figure shows that the errors for the CRT algorithm V.1 match the errors for the noiseless algorithm
for depths up to two corresponding to the co-prime moduli (3, 5). The CRT algorithm is less robust against noise
compared to the MLE as it requires both probabilities pD
and pD−1 to be good approximations to the true probabilities. The result for the CRT will be incorrect if either
of these probabilities is not estimated correctly.
We also remark that while the MLE based algorithm
performs better on average than the CRT based algorithm, the noiseless success probabilities for the CRT algorithm represented by the green line are lower than the
empirically observed probabilities for the MLE based algorithm in Figure 5.
Let us try to understand in more detail the perfor-

CRT (theory)
CRT
MLE

0.12
0.10

Error

0.08
0.06
0.04
0.02
0.00

0

5000

10000

15000

20000

Oracle Calls

25000

30000

FIG. 7: Comparison of mean error against total number
of oracle calls for MLE, exact CRT and CRT algorithms
for depths ranging from 1 to 7. The black dashed line
represents the baseline error for sampling from the
evaluation oracle, same as the black line in Fig 5.

FIG. 8: Exact probabilities sin2 ((2D + 1)θ) and the
probability estimates with 500 shots for the depths 0
(top left), 3 (top right), 5 (bottom left) and 7 (bottom
right).

mance of the CRT based algorithm. Incorrect estimates
at higher depths are more common due to greater noise
for deeper circuits, resulting in high average error for
the CRT algorithm for samples of depth greater than
three. Figure 8 plots the true success probabilities at
depths zero, three, five, and seven (blue) and the estimates from the runs of the corresponding oracles with
500 shots (red). It can be seen from the figures that
the AE estimates are not always a close approximation
for the true success probabilities. The inputs to the CRT
procedure computed in step 3 of the algorithm differ from
the correct estimates for the outlying data points resulting in an error in the final answer. This results in the
CRT algorithm having higher mean error than the MLE
algorithm.
We can also relate the error models and the experimental results of the CRT based algorithm. The theoretical analysis of the QoPrime algorithm assumed independence of errors over samples so that Chernoff bounds
could be applied. However, in the hardware implementation the errors over the 500 shots are not independent but
correlated in time with larger errors sometimes occurring
on consecutive runs of the circuit, and this results in a
non-smooth approximation to the success probabilities.
It should be noted that the next generation QPU is an
experimental system and further improvements in gate
fidelity and calibration should improve the quality of approximation for the data points and the performance of
the CRT based AE algorithm.

9
VI. AMPLITUDE ESTIMATION WITH
EXPERIMENTAL HYPERPARAMETER
TUNING

In this section we show that we can further improve
the performance of the amplitude estimation algorithms
by using experimental results on the quantum hardware
to tune some hyper parameters of the algorithms.

A.

Hybrid Amplitude Estimation algorithm

We start with Algorithm VI.2, a simple hybrid algorithm that compares between a low depth MLE based
estimate and the CRT based estimate and tries to output
the one with the smaller error. Such an algorithm tries to
use the higher CRT estimates when they are correct, but
falls back to an MLE based estimate when the CRT estimate seems to be wrong. In order to choose between the
CRT and MLE based estimates we cannot use the estimate with the real smaller error as the true success probabilities are unknown. Instead, we use a heuristic test
condition that outputs the CRT estimate if the MLE and
CRT estimates do not differ more than a β factor times
some average difference |M LEAvg (2) − CRTexact (D)| between the two estimates which are quantities that can be
computed through experiments on some training data.
More precisely, in order to define these quantities we fix
a prior distribution on probabilities, this can be the uniform or a beta distributed prior for example. M LEAvg (2)
is the average mean error for the MLE algorithm at depth
2 (or some other low depth) with the probabilities drawn
from the prior distribution. CRTexact (D) are the mean
errors for the classically simulated CRT algorithm with
probabilities drawn from the prior distribution. In this
case, they can be read off from the blue and green lines as
in Fig 7. The factor β can also be tuned experimentally.
Algorithm VI.1 Hybrid AE algorithm.
Require: Accuracy parameter , parameter β, maximum
depth D and number of shots Nshot . Access to a unitary
A such that A |0i = sin(θ) |1i |000i + sin(θ) |0i |000⊥ i and
to U t = (AS0 A† Sχ )t A for t ∈ [D].
1: Compute an MLE estimate p0 for the quantity sin2 (θ)
using Algorithm IV.1 with maximum depth equal to 2.
2: Compute CRT estimate q0 with maximum depth D using
the CRT algorithm V.1.
3: If |p0 − q0 | > β|M LEAvg (2) − CRTexact (D)| return p0 else
return q0 .

Another way to see the potential advantage of the CRT
based approach is to look at the histograms for the errors
achieved by the algorithm at high depths. Figure 9 shows
the error histograms for the CRT based algorithm with
maximum depth five and seven. It can be seen from
the figure that even at high depths, the CRT based AE
algorithm is able estimate a large fraction of the points
with very low errors. The larger mean errors compared

(a) Depth 5

(b) Depth 7

FIG. 9: Histograms for errors for the CRT based AE
algorithm at depths 5 and 7. This shows a distinct
failure mode for the CRT algorithm, in that many of
the points are estimated accurately, while others are
entirely miscalculated by the algebraic reconstruction of
the CRT. The hybrid algorithm VI.2 is designed to
diagnose this issue.

to MLE can be explained by a few outlying points with
large errors. The algorithm is close to the theoretical
accuracy for depths up to three.
The performance of the hybrid AE algorithm compared
to MLE and the CRT is illustrated in Figure 10. The estimates output by the hybrid algorithm are considerably
better than the CRT based ones and match the MLE
estimates for up to depth equal to five. The hybrid algorithm achieves a minimum mean error of 0.017 at depth
four, which improves upon the mean error 0.018 for the
depth two MLE algorithm. Note also that the hybrid
algorithm uses fewer oracles calls than the MLE based
algorithm for the same maximum depth.

10
B.

Power law Amplitude Estimation

The MLE based amplitude estimation algorithm IV.1
used a linear schedule and a fixed number of shots at each
depth. Namely, we used a schedule of the form (d, Nshot )
for d all integers up to D, the maximum depth. Here we
introduce an additional degree of freedom in the choice of
the exponents in the power-law AE algorithm, studied in
[9]. We propose a noise aware power law AE method that
solves an optimization problem to determine the optimal
exponent for a given target error. The sampling schedules
will be of the form:
Nd = bNshots × (2d + 1)ν c ,

(7)

where Nd is the number of samples taken at depth d, for
d = 0, 1, 2, 3, . . .. The number of shots Nshots was taken
to be 500 and the exponent ν is the hyper-parameter of
the algorithm that we tune experimentally. Assuming an
unbiased estimator, the Cramér-Rao bound can be used
to connect the schedule to the estimation error. When
there is a specific level of (depolarizing) noise γd associated with depth d, the classical Fisher information is
exponentially damped due to the noise. Given the sampling schedule in (7), the problem becomes finding the
exponent ν that minimizes the oracle calls for given a
desired target error, namely:
minimizeν O ∼

D
X

(2d + 1)

ν+1

(8)

d=0

subject to Fnoisy ≡ Nshots

D
X

(2d + 1)ν+2 e−2γd ≥ −2

d=0

(9)
where we introduce a parameter-agnostic approximation
Fnoisy to the true Fisher information. This optimization problem is solved classically, given experimental estimates of the noise levels γd , and allowing the exponent
ν to take values smaller than −1. For the data under consideration, a depolarizing model was fit with noise parameter γd ranging from γ0 = 0.035 at depth zero (evaluation
oracle), up to γ7 = 0.35 at depth seven.
The last step of the algorithm is similar to the first
MLE method in IV.1 in that it performs a noise-aware
Bayesian update on the parameter θ given the data at
each depth d:
p(θ | Nd0 , Nd1 ) ∼ pd (0)Nd0 pd (1)Nd1 p(θ)

1 − e−γd cos(2(2d + 1)θ)
,
2

Finally, one could question the use of the power-law
ansatz (7) in the first place, when the optimization problem in (8) could be formulated more fundamentally as a
linear program over the sampling schedule Nd . The answer lies in the statistical subtleties which appear when
translating the amplitude estimation problem into the
language of classical inference. Specifically, the simple
schedules arising out of solving a naı̈ve linear program
would most likely not lead to unbiased estimators due to
the periodic nature of the likelihood function, as pointed
out in [9]. In short, the choice of a power law schedule
is an empirically-validated compromise which ensures an
unbiased estimator, and thus legitimizes the use of the
simple Cramér-Rao bound above. More work is needed
in order to obtain provable guarantees with such sampling schedules.

Algorithm VI.2 Noise aware Power Law MLE algorithm.
Require: Target accuracy , maximum depth D, number of
shots Nshots , noise levels γd for d ∈ [D]. Access to a unitary A such that A |0i = sin(θ) |1i |000i+sin(θ) |0i |000⊥ i
and to U d = (AS0 A† Sχ )d A for d ∈ [D].
1: Find optimal power-law schedule S = {(d, Nd )}, with d ∈
[D], using Equations (7) and (8).
2: Initialize the prior to the uniform distribution on angles
for integer valued k ∈ [0, 1 ), i.e. p(θ) = 1 , ∀θ.
θ = πk
2
3: for (d, Nd ) ∈ S do
4: Initialize Nd0 = Nd1 = 0, these variables record the 0 and
1 counts for the depth-d measurements.
5: for i=1 to Nd do
6: Apply the unitary U d and measure the resulting quantum
state in the standard basis.
7: Postprocessing: If the outcome is the state |1000i then
Nd0 = Nd0 + 1, else if the outcome is a different unary
string then Nd1 = Nd1 + 1, else do nothing.
8: end for
9: Perform Bayesian updates according to (10) and renormalize to obtain the posterior probability distribution.
10: end for
11: Output θ with the highest probability according to the
final posterior probability distribution.

(10)

Where Nd0 and Nd1 are the number of 0s and 1s measured
at depth d, and in the depolarizing noise assumption the
measurement probabilities are:
pd (1) =

The maximum-likelihood estimates for the power-law
method were performed on data which is sampled without replacement from the measurements at each depth.
Namely, for every target error we construct a dataset
with Nd ≤ N0 = 500 Bernoulli trials for depths d ≤ 7,
drawn from the dataset of all measurements.

pd (0) = 1 − pd (1)
(11)

The performance of the power law AE algorithm compared to previous AE algorithms is illustrated in Figure
10. The power law algorithm was performed for ten different target errors , where for each case a new optimization problem was solved in order to find the optimal
schedules for the algorithm. We also plot the theoretical
curve that corresponds to Eq. 9.

11

0

Exponent

0.12
0.10

2
4
6

Error

0.08

0

10000 20000 30000

Oracle Calls

CRT (theory)
MLE Power Law (theory)
MLE Power Law
CRT
MLE
Hybrid

0.06
0.04
0.02
0.00

0

5000

10000

15000

20000

Oracle Calls

25000

30000

FIG. 10: Comparison of the all the amplitude
estimation algorithms discussed in this work. The
maximum-likelihood methods perform the best,
particularly when the schedules are optimized with the
power-law method (orange). The CRT based algorithms
have higher mean error, despite the theoretical
guarantees of the algorithm. The black dashed line
represents the baseline mean error for sampling from
the depth 0 evaluation oracle. The inset shows the
optimal exponent ν chosen at various error levels by the
power-law algorithm.

VII.

COMPARISON OF AMPLITUDE
ESTIMATION ALGORITHMS

In Figure 10 we provide a comparison between all different amplitude estimation methods we described above,
namely sampling from the evaluation oracle, MLE based
with linear schedules, MLE based with power law schedules, CRT based, and hybrid. We see that the MLE based
algorithms perform better on hardware, and the one using power law schedules with exponents chosen experimentally achieves the best performance. The CRT based
algorithms have higher mean error than the MLE based
algorithm, though they have better theoretical guarantees and provide good estimates for many inputs. The
black dashed line represents the baseline error for sampling from the evaluation oracle.

tum computer. The high fidelity of the quantum hardware allowed us to run oracle circuits with depths ranging
up to seven which translates to four qubit circuits with
more than ninety two-qubit gates and depth sixty. Similar experiments on quantum hardware available on the
cloud provided considerably worse results.
The MLE based algorithms showed significant improvements in accuracy when higher depth samples were
taken into account reaching errors of less than 0.014 at
depth six, while the error when samples from the evaluation oracle are taken saturates to 0.053. We also developed a more sophisticated version of maximum-likelihood
amplitude estimation based on a power-law schedule.
This introduced two improvements: first, the asymptotic
precision improved since the power-law algorithm incorporates a noise model, albeit an imperfect one. Second,
this noise floor is reached much faster in terms of oracle
calls since the optimal power-law schedules spend fewer
shots at costly higher depths. Note that all maximumlikelihood methods can naturally accommodate any probabilistic noise model in the definition of the likelihoods.
The CRT based algorithm is more sensitive to noise
and it was affected by the hardware noise as well as the
correlated errors across experiments. It achieved a minimum mean error of 0.024 at depth 3, following its design precision curve, before departing from it at larger
depths. A hybrid algorithm that combines small depth
MLE estimates with CRT estimates achieved minimum
mean error of 0.017, an improvement over the depth two
MLE estimates with an average error of 0.018. With improvements in hardware fidelity and calibration the CRT
based and the hybrid algorithms will become competitive
with the MLE based approach.
Note that we restricted the experiments to four qubits,
because our main goal was to probe the regime where the
evaluation oracle is invoked a large number of times in
a noisy setting, achieving up to fifteen sequential oracle
invocations with still excellent results. A next step would
be to establish tradeoffs between circuit depth and number of oracle calls in an experimental setting, as theoretically proved in [9], and this may soon become feasible
with further improvements in hardware.

IX.
VIII.

AUTHOR CONTRIBUTION

CONCLUSIONS

We reported the results for experiments on low depth
Amplitude Estimation algorithms using MLE and CRT
based approaches on a state-of-the-art trapped ion quan-

A.P., T.G-T, W.Z. and I.K. designed the algorithms
and performed the analysis for the experimental data.
J.N., N.P., K.S., K.W. and S.J. performed the experiments on the IonQ hardware.

[1] Scott Aaronson and Patrick Rall. Quantum approximate
counting, simplified. In Symposium on Simplicity in Algorithms, pages 24–32. SIAM, 2020.
[2] Daniel S Abrams and Colin P Williams. Fast quantum al-

gorithms for numerical integrals and stochastic processes.
arXiv preprint quant-ph/9908083, 1999.
[3] J Allcock, CY Hsieh, I Kerenidis, and S Zhang. Quantum algorithms for feedforward neural networks. ACM

12
Transactions on Quantum Computing 1 (1), 1-24, 2020.
[4] Gilles Brassard, Frederic Dupuis, Sebastien Gambs, and
Alain Tapp. An optimal quantum algorithm to approximate the mean and its application for approximating
the median of a set of points over an arbitrary distance.
arXiv:1106.4267, 2011.
[5] Gilles Brassard, Peter Hoyer, Michele Mosca, and Alain
Tapp. Quantum amplitude amplification and estimation.
Contemporary Mathematics, 305:53–74, 2002.
[6] Paul Burchard. Lower bounds for parallel quantum
counting. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.04555, 2019.
[7] Shouvanik Chakrabarti, Rajiv Krishnakumar, Guglielmo
Mazzola, Nikitas Stamatopoulos, Stefan Woerner, and
William J Zeng. A threshold for quantum advantage in
derivative pricing. Quantum, 5:463, 2021.
[8] Daniel J Egger, Ricardo Garcı́a Gutiérrez, Jordie Cahue
Mestre, and Stefan Woerner. Credit risk analysis using
quantum computers. IEEE Transactions on Computers,
2020.
[9] Tudor Giurgica-Tiron, Iordanis Kerenidis, Farrokh
Labib, Anupam Prakash, and William Zeng. Low depth
algorithms for quantum amplitude estimation. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2012.03348, 2020.
[10] Dmitry Grinko, Julien Gacon, Christa Zoufal, and Stefan
Woerner. Iterative quantum amplitude estimation. npj
Quantum Information, 7(1):1–6, 2021.
[11] Lov K Grover. A framework for fast quantum mechanical
algorithms. In Proceedings of the thirtieth annual ACM
symposium on Theory of computing, pages 53–62, 1998.
[12] Yassine Hamoudi and Frédéric Magniez.
Quantum
Chebyshev’s inequality and applications. In 46th International Colloquium on Automata, Languages, and
Programming (ICALP 2019). Schloss Dagstuhl-LeibnizZentrum fuer Informatik, 2019.
[13] Steven Herbert. Quantum monte-carlo integration: The
full advantage in minimal circuit depth. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2105.09100, 2021.
[14] Stacey Jeffery, Frederic Magniez, and Ronald De Wolf.
Optimal parallel quantum query algorithms. Algorithmica, 79(2):509–529, 2017.
[15] Sonika Johri, Shantanu Debnath, Avinash Mocherla,
Alexandros Singk, Anupam Prakash, Jungsang Kim, and
Iordanis Kerenidis. Nearest centroid classification on a
trapped ion quantum computer. npj Quantum Information, 7(1):1–11, 2021.
[16] S. Debnath et al. . K. Wright, K.M. Beck. Benchmarking
an 11-qubit quantum computer. Nat Commun, 10, 2019.
[17] Kazuya Kaneko, Koichi Miyamoto, Naoyuki Takeda, and
Kazuyoshi Yoshino. Quantum pricing with a smile: Implementation of local volatility model on quantum computer. arXiv:2007.01467, 2020.
[18] I Kerenidis, J Landman, and A Prakash. Quantum algorithms for deep convolutional neural networks. Eighth
International Conference on Learning Representations
ICLR, 2019.
[19] Iordanis Kerenidis, Jonas Landman, and Natansh
Mathur. Classical and quantum algorithms for orthogonal neural networks. arXiv:2106.07198, 2021.
[20] Tongyang Li and Xiaodi Wu. Quantum query complexity
of entropy estimation. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 65(5):2899–2921, 2018.
[21] Natansh Mathur, Jonas Landman, Yun Yvonna Li, Martin Strahm, Skander Kazdaghli, Anupam Prakash, and
Iordanis Kerenidis. Medical image classification via quan-

tum neural networks. arXiv:2109.01831, 2021.
[22] Koichi Miyamoto. Bermudan option pricing by quantum
amplitude estimation and chebyshev interpolation. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2108.09014, 2021.
[23] Koichi Miyamoto and Kenji Shiohara. Reduction of
qubits in a quantum algorithm for Monte Carlo simulation by a pseudo-random-number generator. Physical
Review A, 102(2):022424, 2020.
[24] Ashley Montanaro.
Quantum speedup of Monte
Carlo methods.
Proceedings of the Royal Society
A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences,
471(2181):20150301, 2015.
[25] Kirill Plekhanov, Matthias Rosenkranz, Mattia Fiorentini, and Michael Lubasch. Variational quantum amplitude estimation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.03687, 2021.
[26] Sergi Ramos-Calderer, Adrián Pérez-Salinas, Diego
Garcı́a-Martı́n, Carlos Bravo-Prieto, Jorge Cortada,
Jordi Planagumà, and José I Latorre.
Quantum
unary approach to option pricing. Physical Review A,
103(3):032414, 2021.
[27] Pooja Rao, Kwangmin Yu, Hyunkyung Lim, Dasol Jin,
and Deokkyu Choi. Quantum amplitude estimation algorithms on ibm quantum devices. In Quantum Communications and Quantum Imaging XVIII, volume 11507,
page 115070O. International Society for Optics and Photonics, 2020.
[28] Patrick Rebentrost, Brajesh Gupt, and Thomas R Bromley. Quantum computational finance: Monte Carlo
pricing of financial derivatives. Physical Review A,
98(2):022321, 2018.
[29] Nikitas Stamatopoulos, Daniel J Egger, Yue Sun, Christa
Zoufal, Raban Iten, Ning Shen, and Stefan Woerner. Option pricing using quantum computers. Quantum, 4:291,
2020.
[30] Roland Guichard Steven Herbert and Darren Ng. Noiseaware quantum amplitude estimation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2109.04840, 2021.
[31] Yohichi Suzuki, Shumpei Uno, Rudy Raymond, Tomoki
Tanaka, Tamiya Onodera, and Naoki Yamamoto. Amplitude estimation without phase estimation. Quantum
Information Processing, 19(2):75, 2020.
[32] Tomoki Tanaka, Yohichi Suzuki, Shumpei Uno, Rudy
Raymond, Tamiya Onodera, and Naoki Yamamoto. Amplitude estimation via maximum likelihood on noisy
quantum computer. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.16223,
2020.
[33] Almudena Carrera Vazquez and Stefan Woerner. Efficient state preparation for quantum amplitude estimation. Physical Review Applied, 15(3):034027, 2021.
[34] Stefan Woerner and Daniel J Egger. Quantum risk analysis. npj Quantum Information, 5(1):1–8, 2019.
[35] Christof Zalka. Grover’s quantum searching algorithm is
optimal. Physical Review A, 60(4):2746, 1999.

