                                                   Hamiltonian Simulation Algorithms for
                                                     Near-Term Quantum Hardware
                                                  Laura Clinton ∗1,2 , Johannes Bausch †1,3 , and Toby Cubitt ‡1
                                                                              1
                                                                     PhaseCraft Ltd.
                                                2
                                                  Department of Computer Science, University College London




arXiv:2003.06886v3 [quant-ph] 26 Aug 2021
                                                         3
                                                           CQIF, DAMTP, University of Cambridge


                                                                                  November 2019



                                                    The quantum circuit model is the de-facto way of designing quantum algo-
                                                 rithms. Yet any level of abstraction away from the underlying hardware incurs
                                                 overhead. In this work, we develop quantum algorithms for Hamiltonian simula-
                                                 tion “one level below” the circuit model, exploiting the underlying control over
                                                 qubit interactions available in most quantum hardware and deriving analytic
                                                 circuit identities for synthesising multi-qubit evolutions from two-qubit interac-
                                                 tions. We then analyse the impact of these techniques under the standard error
                                                 model where errors occur per gate, and an error model with a constant error
                                                 rate per unit time.
                                                    To quantify the benefits of this approach, we apply it to time-dynamics simula-
                                                 tion of the 2D spin Fermi-Hubbard model. Combined with new error bounds for
                                                 Trotter product formulas tailored to the non-asymptotic regime and an analysis
                                                 of error propagation, we find that e.g. for a 5 × 5 Fermi-Hubbard lattice we re-
                                                 duce the circuit depth from 1, 243, 586 using the best previous fermion encoding
                                                 and error bounds in the literature, to 3, 209 in the per-gate error model, or the
                                                 circuit-depth-equivalent to 259 in the per-time error model. This brings Hamil-
                                                 tonian simulation, previously beyond reach of current hardware for non-trivial
                                                 examples, significantly closer to being feasible in the NISQ era.

                                            ∗
                                              laura@phasecraft.io
                                            †
                                              johannes@phasecraft.io
                                            ‡
                                              toby@phasecraft.io




                                                                                         1
Introduction
Quantum computing is on the cusp of entering the era in which quantum hardware can no
longer be simulated effectively classically, even on the world’s biggest supercomputers [1,
2, 3, 4, 5]. Google recently achieved the first so-called “quantum supremacy” milestone
demonstrating this [6]. Whilst reaching this milestone is an impressive experimental physics
achievement, the very definition of this goal allows it to be a demonstration that has no
useful practical applications [7]. The recent Google results are of exactly this nature. By far
the most important question for quantum computing now is to determine whether there are
useful applications of this class of noisy, intermediate-scale quantum (NISQ) hardware [8].
   However, current quantum hardware is still extremely limited, with ≈ 50 qubits capable
of implementing quantum circuits up to a gate depth of ≈ 20 [6]. This is far too limited to
run useful instances of even the simplest textbook quantum algorithms, let alone implement
the error correction and fault-tolerance required for large-scale quantum computations. Es-
timates of the number of qubits and gates required to run Shor’s algorithm on integers that
cannot readily be factored on classical computers place it – and related number-theoretic
algorithms – well into the regime of requiring a fully scalable, fault-tolerant quantum com-
puter [9, 10]. Studies of practically relevant combinatorial problems tell a similar story for
capitalising on the quadratic speedup of Grover’s algorithm [11]. Quantum computers are
naturally well-suited for simulation of quantum many-body systems [12, 13] – a task that
is notoriously difficult on classical computers. Quantum simulation is likely to be one of
the first practical applications of quantum computing. But, whilst the number of qubits
required to run interesting quantum simulations may be lower than for other applications,
careful studies of the gate counts required for a quantum chemistry simulation of molecules
that are not easily tractible classically [14], or for simple condensed matter models [15],
remain far beyond current hardware.
   With severely resource-constrained hardware such as this, squeezing every ounce of per-
formance out of it is crucial. The quantum circuit model is the standard way to design
quantum algorithms, and quantum gates and circuits provide a highly convenient abstrac-
tion of quantum hardware. Circuits sit at a significantly lower level of abstraction than even
assembly code in classical computing. But any layer of abstraction sacrifices some overhead
for the sake of convenience. The quantum circuit model is no exception.
   In the underlying hardware, quantum gates are typically implemented by controlling
interactions between qubits. E.g. by changing voltages to bring superconducting qubits in
and out of resonance; or by laser pulses to manipulate the internal states of trapped ions.
By restricting to a fixed set of standard gates, the circuit model abstracts away the full
capabilities of the underlying hardware. In the NISQ era, it is not clear this sacrifice is
justified. The Solovay-Kitaev theorem tells us that the overhead of any particular choice
of universal gate set is at most poly-logarithmic [16, 17]. But when the available circuit
depth is limited to ≈ 20, even a constant factor improvement could make the difference
between being able to run an algorithm on current hardware, and being beyond the reach
of foreseeable hardware.
   The advantages of designing quantum algorithms “one level below” the circuit model be-
come particularly acute in the case of Hamiltonian time-dynamics simulation. To simulate
                                                  P
evolution under a many-body Hamiltonian H = hi,ji hij , the basic Trotterization algo-
rithm [13, 18] repeatedly time-evolves the system under each individual interaction hij for
a small time-step δ,                                     
                                         T /δ
                                         Y Y
                                e−iHT ≃         e−ihij δ  .                           (1)
                                         n=0       hi,ji

To achieve good precision, δ must be small. In the circuit model, each e−ihij δ Trotter step
necessarily requires at least one quantum gate to implement. Thus the required circuit
depth – and hence the total run-time – is at least T /δ. Contrast this with the run-time if
we were able to implement e−ihij δ directly in time δ. The total run-time would then be T ,
which improves on the circuit model algorithm by a factor of 1/δ. This is “only” a constant
factor improvement, in line with the Solovay-Kitaev theorem. But this “constant” can be
very large; indeed, it diverges to ∞ as the precision of the algorithm increases.
   It is unrealistic to assume the hardware can implement e−ihij δ for any desired interaction
hij and any time δ. Furthermore, the available interactions are typically limited to at
most a handful of specific types, determined by the underlying physics of the device’s qubit
and quantum gate implementations. And these interactions cannot be switched on and
off arbitrarily fast, placing a limit on the smallest achievable value of δ. There are also
experimental challenges associated with implementing gates with small δ with the same
fidelities as those with δ ≈ O(1).
   A major criticism of analogue computation (classical and quantum) is that it cannot
cope with errors and noise. The “N” in NISQ stands for “noisy”; errors and noise will
be a significant factor in all foreseeable quantum hardware. But near-term hardware has
few resources to spare even on basic error correction, let alone fault-tolerance. Indeed,
near-term hardware may not always have the necessary capabilities. E.g. the intermediate
measurements required for active error-correction are not possible in all superconducting
circuit hardware [19, Sec. II].
   Algorithms that cope well with errors and noise, and still give reasonable results without
active error correction or fault-tolerance, are thus critical for NISQ applications.
   Designing algorithms “one level below” the circuit model can also in some cases reduce
the impact of errors and noise during the algorithm. Again, this benefit is particularly acute
in Hamiltonian simulation algorithms. If an error occurs on a qubit in a quantum circuit,
a two-qubit gate acting on the faulty qubit can spread the error to a second qubit. In the
absence of any error-correction or fault-tolerance, errors can spread to an additional qubit
with each two-qubit gate applied, so that after circuit depth n the error can spread to all n
qubits.
   In the circuit model, each e−ihij δ Trotter step requires at least one two-qubit gate. So a
single error can be spread throughout the quantum computer after simulating time-evolution
for time as short as δn. However, if a two-qubit interaction e−ihij δ is implemented directly,
one would intuitively expect it to only “spread the error” by a small amount δ for each such
time-step. Thus we might expect it to take time O(n) before the error can propagate to all



                                               3
n qubits – a factor of 1/δ improvement. Another way of viewing this is that, in the circuit
model, the Lieb-Robinson velocity [20] at which effects propagate in the system is always
O(1), regardless of what unitary dynamics is being implemented by the overall circuit. In
contrast, the Trotterized Hamiltonian evolution has the same Lieb-Robinson velocity as the
dynamics being simulated: O(1/δ) in the same units.
   The Fermi-Hubbard model is believed to capture, in a simplified toy model, key aspects
of high-temperature superconductors, which are still less well understood theoretically than
their low-temperature brethren. Its Hamiltonian is given by a combination of on-site and
hopping terms:
                            N
                                     (i)                (i,j,σ)
                            X                  X
                   HFH :=         hon-site +           hhopping                           (2)
                            i=1                i<j,σ
                               N                       X †                
                                 a†i↑ ai↑ a†i↓ ai↓ + v   aiσ ajσ + a†jσ aiσ .
                               X
                        := u
                               i=1                       i<j,σ

describing electrons with spin σ =↑ or ↓ hopping between neighbouring sites on a lattice,
with an on-site interaction between opposite-spin electrons at the same site. The Fermi-
Hubbard model serves as a particularly good test-bed for NISQ Hamiltonian simulation
algorithms for a number of reasons [21, Sec. IV], beyond the fact that it is a scientifically
interesting model in its own right:

  1. The Fermi-Hubbard model was a famous, well-studied condensed matter model long
     before quantum computing was proposed. It is therefore less open to the criticism of
     being an artificial problem tailored to fit the algorithm.

  2. It is a fermionic model, which poses particular challenges for simulation on (qubit-
     based) quantum computers. Most of the proposed practical applications of quantum
     simulation involve fermionic systems, either in quantum chemistry or materials science.
     So achieving quantum simulation of fermionic models is an important step on the path
     to practical quantum computing applications.

  3. There have been over three decades of research developing ever-more-sophisticated
     classical simulations of Fermi-Hubbard-model physics [22]. This gives clear bench-
     marks against which to compare quantum algorithms. And it reduces the likelihood
     of there being efficient classical algorithms, which haven’t been discovered because
     little interest or effort has been devoted to the model.

  The state-of-the-art quantum circuit-model algorithm for simulating the time dynamics
of the 2D Fermi-Hubbard model on an 8 × 8 lattice requires ≈ 107 Toffoli gates [15,
Sec. C: Tb. 2]. This includes the overhead for fault-tolerance, which is necessary for the
algorithm to achieve reasonable precision with the gate fidelities available in current and
near-term hardware. But it additionally incorporates performing phase estimation, which is



                                                   4
a significant extra contribution to the gate count. Thus, although this result is indicative of
the scale required for standard circuit-model Hamiltonian simulation, a direct comparison
of this result with time-dynamics simulation would be unfair.
   To establish a fair benchmark, using available Trotter error bounds from the literature [23]
with the best previous choice of fermion encoding in the literature [24], we calculate that
one could achieve a Fermi-Hubbard time-dynamics simulation on a 5 × 5 square lattice,
up to time T = 7 and to within 10% accuracy, using 50 qubits and 1, 243, 586 standard
two-qubit gates. This estimate assumes the effects of decoherence and errors in the circuit
can be neglected, which is certainly over-optimistic.
   Our results rely on developing more sophisticated techniques for synthesising many-body
interactions out of the underlying one- and two-qubit interactions available in the quantum
hardware (see Results). This gives us access to e−ihij δ for more general interactions hij .
We then quantify the type of gains discussed here under two precisely defined error models,
which correspond to different assumptions about the hardware. By using the aforementioned
techniques to synthesise local Trotter steps, exploiting a recent fermion encoding specifically
designed for this type of algorithm [25], deriving tighter error bounds on the higher-order
Trotter expansions that account for all constant factors, and carefully analysing analytically
and numerically the impact and rate of spread of errors in the resulting algorithm, we
improve on this by multiple orders of magnitude even in the presence of decoherence. For
example, we show that a 5 × 5 Fermi-Hubbard time-dynamics simulation up to time T = 7
can be performed to 10% accuracy in what we refer to as a per-gate error model with
≈ 50 qubits and the equivalent of circuit depth 72, 308. This is a conservative estimate
and based on analytic Trotter error bounds that we derive in this paper. Using numerical
extrapolation of Trotter errors, a circuit depth of 3, 209 can be reached. In the second
error model, which we refer to as a per-time error model, we prove rigorously that the
same simulation is achievable in a circuit-depth-equivalent run-time of 1, 686; numerical
error computations bring this down to 259. In the per-time model, for some parameter
regimes we are also able to exploit the inherent partial error-detection properties of local
fermionic encodings to enable error mitigation strategies to reduce the resource cost. This
brings Hamiltonian simulation, previously beyond reach of current hardware for non-trivial
examples, significantly closer to being feasible in the NISQ era.


Results and Discussion
Circuit Error Models
We consider two error models for quantum computation in this work. The first error model
assumes that noise occurs at a constant rate per gate, independent of the time it takes to
implement that gate. This is the standard error model in quantum computation theory,
in which the cost of a computation is proportional to its circuit depth. We refer to this
model as the per gate error model. The second error model assumes that noise occurs at



                                              5
a constant rate per unit time. This is the traditional model of errors in physics, where
dissipative noise is more commonly modelled by continuous-time master equations, which
translates to the per-time error model. In this model, the errors accumulate proportionately
to the time the interactions in the system are switched on, thus with the total pulse lengths.
We refer to this as the per time error model We emphasise that these error models are
not fundamentally about execution time, but about an error budget required to execute a
particular circuit. While it is clear that deeper circuits experience more decoherence, how
much each gate contributes to it can be analysed from two different perspectives. The two
error models we study correspond to two difference models of how noise scales in quantum
hardware.
   Which of these more accurately models errors in practice is hardware-dependent. For
example, in NMR experiments, the per-time model is common [26, 27, 28]. The per-time
model is not without basis in more recent quantum hardware, too. Recent work has de-
veloped and experimentally tested duration-scaled two-qubit gates using Qiskit Pulse and
IBM devices [29, 30]. In [30] the authors experimentally observe braiding of Majorana zero
modes using and IBM device and parameterized two-qubit gates. They also find a rela-
tionship between relative gate errors and the duration of these parameterised gates which
is further validated in [29]. The authors of [29] explicitly attribute the reduction in error –
seen using these duration-scaled gates in place of CNOT gates – to the shorter schedules of
the scaled gates relative to the coherence time.
   Nonetheless, the standard per-gate error model is also very relevant to current quantum
hardware hardware. Therefore, throughout this paper we carry out full error analyses of all
our algorithms in both of these error models.
   Both of these error models are idealisations. Both are reasonable from a theoretical per-
spective and supported by certain experiments. Analysing both error models allows different
algorithm implementations to be compared fairly under different error regimes. In particu-
lar, analysing both of these error models gives a more stringent test of new techniques than
considering only the “standard error model” of quantum computation, which corresponds
to the per gate model.
   We show that in both error models, significant gains can be achieved using our new
techniques.
   In our analysis, for simplicity we treat single-qubit gates as a free resource in both error
models. There are three reasons for making this simplification, Firstly, single-qubit gates
can typically be implemented with an order of magnitude higher fidelity in hardware, so
contribute significantly less to the error budget than two-qubit gates. Secondly, they do not
propagate errors to the same extent as two-qubit gates (cf. only costing T gates in studies
of fault-tolerant quantum computation). Thirdly, any quantum circuit can be decomposed
with at most a single layer of single-qubit gates between each layer of two-qubit gates.
Thus including single-qubit gates in the per gate error model changes the absolute numbers
by a constant factor ≤ 2 in the worst case. Nor does it significantly affect comparisons




                                              6
between different algorithm designs. This is particularly true of product formula simulation
algorithms, where the algorithms are composed of the same layers of gates repeated over
and over.
   Additionally, there is a benefit to utilising our synthesis techniques regardless of error
model. Decomposing the simulation into gates of the form e−ihij δ using these methods
allows us to exploit the underlying error detection properties of fermionic encodings, as
explained in Supplementary Methods and demonstrated in Figure 2 (see below).
   Tables 1 and 2 compare these results, showing how the combination of sub-circuit algo-
rithms, recent advances in fermion encodings (VC = Verstraete-Cirac encoding [24], com-
pact = encoding reported in [25]), and tighter Trotter bounds (both analytic and numeric)
successively reduce the run-time of the simulation algorithm. (Tcost = circuit-depth for
per-gate error model, or sum of pulse lengths for per-time error model.)

Synthesis of Encoded Fermi-Hubbard Hamiltonian Trotter Layers
To simulate fermionic systems on a quantum computer, one must encode the fermionic
Fock space into qubits. There are many encodings in the literature [31] but we confine our
analysis to two: the Verstraete-Cirac (VC) encoding [24], and the compact encoding recently
introduced in [25]. We have selected these two encodings as they minimise the maximum
Pauli weight of the encoded interactions, which is a key factor in the efficiency of Trotter-
based algorithms and of our sub-circuit techniques: weight-4 (VC) and weight-3 (compact),
respectively. By comparison, the classic Jordan-Wigner transformation [31] results in a
maximum Pauli weight that scales as as O (L) with the lattice size L; the Bravyi-Kitaev
encoding [32] has interaction terms of weight O(log L); and the Bravyi-Kitaev superfast
encoding [32] results in weight-8 interactions.
   Under the compact encoding, the fermionic operators in Equation (2) are mapped to
operators on qubits arranged on two stacked square grids of qubits (one corresponding to
the spin up, and one to the spin down sector, as shown in Figure 3d), augmented by a
face-centred ancilla in a checkerboard pattern, with an enumeration explained in Figure 3a.
   The on-site, horizontal and vertical local terms in the Fermi-Hubbard Hamiltonian Equa-
tion (2) are mapped under this encoding to qubit operators as follows:
                      (i)      u
                     hon-site →  (1 − Zi↑ ) (1 − Zi↓ )                                      (3)
                               4
                  (i,j,σ)      v                                          
                hhopping,hor →    Xi,σ Xj,σ Yfij0 ,σ + Yi,σ Yj,σ Yfij0 ,σ                   (4)
                               2
                 (i,j,σ)       v                                                 
                hhopping,vert → (−1)g(i,j) Xi,σ Xj,σ Xfij0 ,σ + Yi,σ Yj,σ Xfij0 ,σ ,        (5)
                               2
where qubit fij0 is the face-centered ancilla closest to vertex (i, j), and g(i, j) indicates an
associated sign choice in the encoding, as explained in [25].
  If the VC encoding is used, the fermionic operators in Equation (2) are mapped to qubits
arranged on two stacked square grids of qubits (again with one corresponding to spin up,
the other to spin down, as shown in Figure 4), augmented by an ancilla qubit for each data



                                                 7
qubit and with an enumeration explained in Figure 4a. In this case the on-site, horizontal
and vertical local terms are mapped to
                        (i)      u
                      hon-site →   (1 − Zi↑ ) (1 − Zi↓ )                                     (6)
                                 4
                   (i,j,σ)       v                                        
                 hhopping,hor →     Xi,σ Zi0 ,σ Xj,σ + Yi,σ Zi0 ,σ Yj,σ                      (7)
                                 2
                  (i,j,σ)        v                                                     
                 hhopping,vert →    Xi,σ Yi0 ,σ Yj,σ Xj 0 ,σ − Yi,σ Yi0 ,σ Xj,σ Xj 0 ,σ ,    (8)
                                 2
where i0 indicates the ancilla qubit associated with qubit i.
   In both encodings, we partition the resulting Hamiltonian H – a sum of on-site, horizontal
and vertical qubit interaction terms on the augmented square lattice – into M = 5 layers
H = H1 + H2 + H3 + H4 + H5 , as shown in Figures 3 and 4. The Hamiltonians for each
layer do not commute with one another. Each layer is a sum of mutually-commuting local
                                                                      P (i)
terms acting on disjoint subsets of the qubits. For instance, H5 = i hon−site is a sum of
all the two-local, non-overlapping, on-site terms.
   The Trotter product formula Pp (T, δ) comprises local unitaries, corresponding to the
local interaction terms that make up the five layers of Hamiltonians that we decomposed
the Fermi Hubbard Hamiltonian into.
   In order to implement each step of the product formula as a sequence of gates, we would
ideally simply execute all two-, three- (for the compact encoding), or four-local (for the
VC encoding) interactions necessary for the time evolution directly within the quantum
computer. Yet this is an unrealistic assumption, as the quantum device is more likely to
feature a very restricted set of one- and two-qubit interactions.
   As outlined in the introduction, we assume in our model that arbitrary single qubit
unitaries are available, and that we have access to the continuous family of gates {exp(itZ ⊗
Z)} for arbitrary values of t. In contrast, the gates we wish to implement all have the form
exp(iδZ ⊗k ) for k = 3 or 4. (Or different products of k Pauli operators, but these are all
equivalent up to local unitaries, which we are assuming are available.)
   It is well known that a unitary describing the evolution under any k-local Pauli interac-
tion can be straightforwardly decomposed into CNOT gates and single qubit rotations [18,
Sec. 4.7.3]. For instance, we can decompose evolution under a 3-local Pauli as

                              eiδZ1 Z2 Z3 = e−iπ/4Z1 X2 eiδY2 Z3 eiπ/4Z1 X2 ,                (9)

where we then further decompose the remaining 2-local evolutions in Equation (9) using
the exact same method as

                                eiδY2 Z3 = e−iπ/4Y2 X3 eiδY3 eiπ/4Y2 X3 .                   (10)

This effectively corresponds to decomposing eiδZ1 Z2 Z3 into CNOT gates and single qubit
rotations, as e±iπ/4Zi Zj is equivalent to a CNOT gate up to single qubit rotations. To
generate evolution under any k-local Pauli interaction we can simply iterate this procedure,
which yields a constant overhead ∝ 2(k − 1) × π/4.



                                                    8
   Can we do better? Even optimized variants of Solovay-Kitaev to decompose multi-qubit
gates – beyond introducing an additional error – generally yield gate sequences multiple or-
ders of magnitude larger, as e.g. demonstrated in [33]. While more recent results conjecture
that an arbitrary three-qubit gate can be implemented with at most eight O(1) two-local
entangling gates [34], this is still worse than the conjugation method for the particular case
of a rank one Pauli interaction that we are concerned with.
   For small pulse times δ, the existing decompositions are thus inadequate, as they all
introduce a gate cost Ω(1) + O(δ). In this paper, we develop a series of analytic pulse
sequence identities (see Lemmas 7 and 8 in Supplementary Methods, which allow us to
decompose the three-qubit and four-qubit gates as approximately The approximations in
Equations (11) and (12) are shown to first order in δ. Exact analytic expressions, which
also hold for δ ≥ 1, are derived in Supplementary Methods. The constants in Equation (12)
have been rounded to the third significant figure.
                                     √           √
                    eiδZ1 Z2 Z3 ≈ e−i δ/2Z1 X2 ei δ/2Y2 Z3
                                          √            √
                                      × ei δ/2Z1 X2 e−i δ/2Y2 Z3 ,                        (11)
                                             2/3 Y Z Z               1/3 Z X              2/3 Y Z Z
                 eiδZ1 Z2 Z3 Z4 ≈ e−i0.22δ        2 3 4
                                                          e−i1.13δ        1 2
                                                                                ei0.44δ        2 3 4

                                                  1/3 Z X               2/3 Y Z Z
                                      × ei1.13δ        1 2
                                                             e−i0.22δ        2 3 4
                                                                                      .                (12)

In reality we use the exact versions of these decompositions, which we also note are still
exact for δ ≥ 1. The depth-5 decomposition in Equation (12) yields the shortest overall run-
time when breaking down higher-weight interactions in a recursive fashion, assuming that
the remaining 3-local gates are decomposed using an expression similar to Equation (11).
We also carry out numerical studies that indicate that these decompositions are likely to be
optimal. (See Supplementary Methods.) These circuit decompositions allow us to establish
that, for a weight-k interaction term, there exists a pulse sequence which implements the
evolution operator for time δ with an overhead ∝ δ 1/(k−1) , achieved by recursively applying
these decompositions. While we have only made reference to interactions of the form Z ⊗k ,
we remark that this is sufficient as we can obtain any other interaction term of the same
weight, for example ZXZ, by conjugating Z ⊗k by single qubit rotations, H and SHS † in
this example (where H is a Hadamard and S a phase gate).
   For the interactions required for our Fermi-Hubbard simulation, the overhead of decom-
                                                                 √
posing short-pulse gates with this analytic decomposition is ∝ δ for any weight-3 interac-
tion term, and ∝ δ 1/3 for weight-4. The asymptotic run-time is thus O(T δ0w ) for w = −1/2
(compact encoding) or w = −2/3 (VC encoding). We show the exact scaling for k = 3 and
k = 4 in Figure 1, as compared to the standard conjugation method.

Tighter Error Bounds for Trotter Product Formulas
There are by now a number of sophisticated quantum algorithms for Hamiltonian simulation,
achieving optimal asymptotic scaling in some or all parameters [35, 36, 37]. Recently, [38]



                                                     9
                                                                                 5

             1                                                                   2
          0.50
                                                                                 1
  cost                                                                 cost
          0.10                                                                  0.5
          0.05
                                                                                0.2
                                   cost[exp(i δ Z1 Z2 Z3 )]                                            cost[exp(i δ Z1 Z2 Z3 Z4 )]
          0.01
             10-5   10-4   0.001       0.010   0.100           1                  10-5   10-4   0.001        0.010     0.100           1
                                   δ                                                                     δ


Figure 1: Gate decomposition cost Tcost for decomposing exp(iδZ ⊗3 ) (left) and exp(iδZ ⊗4 )
          (right), for δ ∈ [10−5 , 1]. The lower dashed line is the cost obtained by conjugation
          decomposition, π/2 + δ. The upper dashed line is the cost for a once-nested
          conjgation, π + δ. Decomposing the four-local gate with an outer depth-5 and
          an inner depth-4 formula according to Equations (11) and (12) only saturates the
          lower conjugation cost bound.


have shown that previous error bounds on Trotter product formulae were over-pessimistic.
They derived new bounds showing that the older, simpler, product-formula algorithms
achieve almost the same asymptotic scaling as the more sophisticated algorithms.
   For near-term hardware, achieving good asymptotic scaling is almost irrelevant; what
matters is minimising the actual circuit depth for the particular target system being simu-
lated. Similarly, in the NISQ regime we do not have the necessary resources to implement
full active error-correction and fault-tolerance. But we can still consider ways of minimising
the output error probability for the specific computation being carried out. Simple product-
formula algorithms allow good control of error propagation in the absence of active error-
correction and fault-tolerance. Furthermore, combining product-formula algorithms with
our circuit decompositions allows us to exploit the error detection properties of fermionic
encodings. We can use this to relax the effective noise rates required for accurate simula-
tions, especially if we are willing to allow the simulation to include some degree of simulated
natural noise. This is explained further the Supplementary Methods and the results of this
technique are shown in Figure 2
   For these reasons, we choose to implement the time evolution operator U (T ) := exp(−iT H)
by employing Trotter product formulae U (T ) =: Pp (δ)T /δ +Rp (T, δ). Here, Rp (T, δ) denotes
the error term remaining from the approximate decomposition into a product of individual




                                                                   10
terms, defined directly as Rp (T, δ) := U (T ) − Pp (δ)T /δ . This includes the simple first-order
formula [13]
                                  T /δ M
                                  YY
                  P1 (δ)T /δ :=                e−iHi δ ,                                            (13)
                                  n=1 i=1

as well as higher-order variants [39, 40, 38]
                                  M
                                  Y                    1
                                                       Y
                                            −iHj δ/2
                     P2 (δ) :=          e                    e−iHj δ/2 ,                            (14)
                                  j=1                  j=M

                    P2k (δ) := P2k−2 (ak δ)2 P2k−2 ((1 − 4ak )δ) P2k−2 (ak δ)2                      (15)

for k ∈ N, where the coefficients are given by ak := 1/ 4 − 41/(2k−1) . It is easy to see
                                                                             

that, while for higher-order formulas not all pulse times equal δ, they still asymptotically
scale as Θ(δ). The product formula Pp (δ)T /δ then approximates a time-evolution under
U (δ)T /δ ≈ U (T ), and it describes the sequence of local unitaries to be implemented as a
quantum circuit.
   Choosing the Trotter step δ small means that corrections for every factor in this formula
come in at O δ p+1 for p ∈ {1, 2k : k ∈ N}. Since we have to perform T /δ many rounds,
                     

the overall error scales roughly as O (T δ p ). Yet this rough estimate is insufficient if we need
to calculate the largest-possible δ for our Hamiltonian simulation.
   The Hamiltonian dynamics remain entirely within one fermion number sector, as HFH
commutes with the total fermion number operator. Let Λ denote the number of fermions
present in the simulation, such that kHi |Λ fermions k ≤ Λ as shown in Theorem 23. Let M = 5
denote the number of non-commuting Trotter layers, and set p (T, δ) := kRp (T, δ)k, and as
shorthand p (δ) := p (δ, δ), so that p (T, δ) = T /δ × p (δ).
   To obtain a bound on Pp (δ), we apply the variation of constants formula [41, Th, 4.9]
to Rp (δ), with the condition that Pp (0) = 1, which always holds. As in [38, sec. 3.2], for
δ ≥ 0, we obtain
                                                                      Z δ
                                                           −iδH
                  Pp (δ) = U (δ) + Rp (δ) = e                     +         e−i(δ−τ )H Rp (τ ) dτ   (16)
                                                                       0

where the integrand Rp (τ ) is defined as

                                                 d
                              Rp (τ ) :=           Pp (τ ) − (−iH) Pp (τ ) .                        (17)
                                                dτ
Now, if Pp (δ) is accurate up to pth order – meaning that Rp (δ) = O δ p+1 – it holds
                                                                                  

that the integrand Rp (δ) = O (δ p ). This allows us to restrict its partial derivatives for all
0 ≤ j ≤ p − 1 to ∂τj Rp (0) = 0. For full details see Lemma 13 and [38, Order Conditions].




                                                           11
  Then, following [38], we perform a Taylor expansion of Rp (τ ) around τ = 0, simplifying
the error bound p (δ) ≡ kRp (δ)k to
                                Z δ                       Z δ
                    p (δ) =     e−i(δ−τ )H Rp (τ ) dτ ≤      kRp (τ ) kdτ                  (18)
                               0                           0
                            Z δ
                          =      kRp (0) k + kRp0 (0) kτ + . . . +                          (19)
                             0
                                                   τ p−1
                                                                        
                                     (p−1)
                                  kRp      (0) k          + kSp (τ, 0) k dτ.                (20)
                                                 (p − 1)!

Here we use the aforementioned order condition that for all 0 ≤ j ≤ p − 1 the partial
derivatives satisfy ∂τj Rp (0) = 0, leaving all but the pth or higher remainder terms – Sp (τ, 0)
– equal to zero. Thus
                                  Z δ
                       p (δ) ≤     kSp (τ, 0) kdτ
                                      0
                                  Z δZ 1
                                                                  τp
                               =p        (1 − x)p−1 kRp(p) (xτ ) k dxdτ,                    (21)
                                   0  0                           p!

where we used the integral representation for the Taylor remainder Sp (τ, 0).
  Motivated by this, we look for simple bounds on the pth derivative of the integrand
kRp (τ ) k. At this point our work diverges from [38] by focusing on obtaining bounds on
kRp (τ ) k which have the tightest constants for NISQ-era system sizes, but which now are not
optimal in system size. (See Figure 8 and Lemmas 14 and 19 in Supplementary Methods for
details.) We derive the following explicit error bounds (see Theorem 15 and Corollary 16):

                   p (δ) ≤ δ p+1 M p+1 Λp+1 Gp                                             (22)

where
                                 
                                 1
                                                                         p=1
                     Gp := ×             2
                                                 
                                                     10
                                                          (p+1)(p/2−1)                     (23)
                                 
                                                                         p = 2k, k ≥ 1,
                                      (p + 1)!       3

and
                              2δ p+1 M p+1 Λp+1 p+1
                   p (δ) ≤                    Hp                                           (24)
                                   (p + 1)!

where
                               p/2−1
                                Y         4 + 41/(2i+1)
                     Hp :=                              .                                   (25)
                                i=1
                                          4 − 41/(2i+1)




                                                          12
The above expressions hold for generic Trotter formulae. Using Lemma 19 we can exploit
commutation relations for the specific Hamiltonian at hand (whose structure determines N
and n, see Supplementary Methods). This yields the bound (see Theorem 20):

                                 T δp
                   p (δ) ≤ C1         +
                              (p + 1)!
                                        Z 1
                                T δ                    xτ p+1 xτ N Bp
                                   Z
                             C2       p     (1 − x)p−1       e        dxdτ                (26)
                                δ 0      0               p!

where
                                                               p−1
                                                                N
                      C1 := npBp2 Λp−1 N      M Hp − B p + B p         ×
                                                                Λ
                                                    
                                   (Sp M )2 − (Sp M ) ,                                   (27)
                                                              
                      C2 := nBp2 (M Hp Λ)p N (Sp M )2 − (Sp M ) ,                         (28)

and
                            
                            1                            p=1
                            
                            
                      Bp := 21                            p=2                             (29)
                           
                            1 Qk
                           
                             2  i=2 (1 − 4ai )            p = 2k, k ≥ 2.

These analytic error bounds are then combined with a Taylor-of-Taylor method, by which
                                  (p)
we expand the Taylor coefficient Rp in Equation (21) itself in terms of a power series to
                                                                 (q)
some higher order q > p, with corresponding series coefficients Rp , and a corresponding
remainder-of-remainder error term p,q+1 . The tightest error expression we obtain is (see
Corollary 22 in Supplementary Methods)
                                    q
                                    X δ l+1 Λl+1
                         p (δ) ≤                    f (p, M, l) + p,q+1 (δ),            (30)
                                          (l + 1)!
                                    l=p

where the f (p, M, l) are exactly-calculated coefficients (using a computer algebra package)
that exploit cancellations between the M non-commuting Trotter layers, for a product
formula of order p and series expansion order l (given in Table 3). The series’ remainder
p,q+1 therein is then derived from the analytic bounds in Equation (26) (see Supplementary
Methods for technical details).
   Henceforth, we will assume the tightest choice of p (δ) amongst all the derived error
expressions and choice of p ∈ {1, 2, 4}. In order to guarantee a target error bound p (T, δ) ≤
target , we invert these explicitly derived error bounds and obtain a maximum possible
Trotter step δ0 = δ0 (target ).




                                                     13
                                                           Standard               Subcircuit
     Fermion encoding        Trotter bounds
                                                         decomposition          decomposition
                             [23, Prop. F.4.]               1,243,586                977,103
            VC                   analytic                    121,478                 95,447
                                 numeric                      5,391                   4,236
                                analytic                     98,339                  72,308
          compact
                                numeric                       4,364                   3,209

Table 1: Per-gate run-times. A comparison of the run-time Tcost for lattice size L × L with
         L = 5, overall simulation time T = 7 and target Trotter error target = 0.1, with
         Λ = 5 fermions and coupling strengths |u|, |v| ≤ r = 1. Obtained by minimising
         over product formulas up to 4th order. Tcost = circuit-depth for per-gate error
         model. In either gate decomposition case—standard and sub-circuit—we account
         single-qubit rotations as a free resource as explained in the Introduction; the value
         of Tcost depends only on the two-qubit gates/interactions. Two-qubit unitaries are
         counted by unit time per gate in the per gate error model. Here compact and VC
         denote the choice of fermionic encoding.


Benchmarking the Sub-Circuit-Model
How significant is the improvement of the measures set out in previous sections, as bench-
marked against state-of-the-art results from literature? A first comparison is in terms of
exact asymptotic bounds (which we derive in Corollaries 25 and 26), in terms of the number
of non-commuting Trotter layers M , fermion number Λ, simulation time T and target error
target :
Standard Circuit Synthesis:
                                                                1
                                                                     
                                             2+ p1 1+ p1 1+ p1 − p
                                    
                                T /δ
                    Tcost Pp (δ)       =O M       Λ     T     target ,                (31)

Sub-circuit Synthesis:
                                                                               
                                                 3    1   1    1       1 − 1
                                       
                                 T /δ              + 2p     + 2p   1+ 2p    2p
                    Tcost Pp (δ)            =O M 2      Λ 2      T       target .              (32)

Here we write Tcost for the “run-time” of the quantum circuits – i.e. the sum of pulse times
of all gates within the circuit. (See Definition 3 for a detailed discussion of the cost model
we employ.)
   Beyond asymptotic scaling, and in order to establish a more comprehensive benchmark
that takes into account potentially large but hidden constant factors, we employ our tighter
Trotter error bounds that account for all constant factors, and concretely target a 5 × 5
Fermi-Hubbard Hamiltonian for overall simulation time T = 7 (which is roughly the Lieb-
Robinson time required for the “causality-cone” to spread across the whole lattice, and for



                                                    14
                                                       Standard             Subcircuit
     Fermion encoding        Trotter bounds
                                                     decomposition        decomposition
                             [23, Prop. F.4.]           976,710               59,830
             VC                  analytic                95,409               17,100
                                 numeric                  4,234                1,669
                                 analytic               77,236                 1,686
          compact
                                 numeric                 3,428                  259

Table 2: Per-time run-times. A comparison of the run-time Tcost for lattice size L × L with
         L = 5, overall simulation time T = 7 and target Trotter error target = 0.1, with
         Λ = 5 fermions and coupling strengths |u|, |v| ≤ r = 1. Obtained by minimising
         over product formulas up to 4th order. Tcost = Tcost (Pp (δ0 )T /δ0 ) for per-time error
         model. In either gate decomposition case—standard and sub-circuit—we account
         single-qubit rotations as a free resource; the value of Tcost depends only on the
         two-qubit gates/interactions. Two-qubit unitaries are counted by their respective
         pulse lengths. Here compact and VC denote the choice of fermionic encoding.


correlations to potentially build up between any pair of sites), in the sector of Λ = 5 fermions,
and coupling strengths |u|, |v| ≤ r = 1 as given in Equation (2). For this system, we choose
the optimal Trotter product formula order p that yields the lowest overall run-time, while
still achieving a target error of target = 0.1.
   The results are given in Tables 1 and 2, where we emphasise that in order to maintain
a fair comparison, we always account single-qubit gates as a free resource, for the reasons
discussed in the Introduction, and two-qubit gates are either accounted at one unit of time
per gate in the per-gate error model (making the run-time equal the circuit depth), or
accounted at their pulse length for the per-time error model.
   Our Trotter error bounds yield an order-of-magnitude improvement as compared to [23,
Prop F.4]. And even for existing gate decompositions by conjugation, the recently published
lower-weight compact encoding yields a small but significant improvement. The most strik-
ing advantage comes from utilising the sub-circuit sequence decompositions developed in
this paper, in particular in conjunction with the lower-weight compact fermionic encoding.
   Overall, the combination of Trotter error bounds, numerics, compact fermion encoding
and sub-circuit-model algorithm design, allows us to improve the run-time of the simulation
algorithm from 976,710, to 259 – an improvement of more than three orders of magnitude
over that obtainable using the previous state-of-the-art methods, and a further improvement
over results in the pre-existing literature [15].




                                                15
Figure 2: Target simulation time T vs cost Tcost for a 5×5 lattice FH Hamiltonian HFH from
          Equation (172) using encoding of [25]. Per gate (left column) and per time (right
          column) error models. The three lines represent 1%, 5%, and 10% Trotter error
           given in Equation (76), minimized over formula order p ∈ {1, 2, 4, 6}. Analytic
          Trotter bounds (top row), get δ0 from Corollaries 16 and 22 and Theorem 20;
          numerical bounds (bottom row) by numerical extrapolation (see Supplementary
          Methods). Colors indicate achievable T for a given noise parameter q, keeping
          Trotter and depolarizing errors below the 1%, 5% or 10% bound, accordingly.
          E.g. the purple section of the bottom right 1% plot indicates that all T in that
          range needs q = 10−6 , with Trotter and decoherence error below 1%. Dashed
          lines indicate where error mitigation from [25] can reduce the noise requirements.
          Additional lattice sizes and details shown in Figures 18 to 21 .
Sub-Circuit Algorithms on Noisy Hardware
As ours is a study of quantum simulation on near-term hardware, we cannot neglect deco-
herence errors that inevitably occur throughout the simulation. To address this concern,
we assume an iid noise model described by the qubit depolarizing channel
                                              q                  
                        Nq (ρ) = (1 − q)ρ +     XρX + Y ρY + ZρZ                          (33)
                                              3
applied to each individual qubit in the circuit, and after each gate layer in the Trotter
product formula, such that the bit, phase, and combined bit-phase-flip probability q is
proportional to the elapsed time of the preceding layer. Whilst this standard error model
is simplistic, it is a surprisingly good match to the errors seen in some hardware [6].
   Within this setting, a simple analytic decoherence error bound can readily be derived (see
Supplementary Methods), by calculating the probability that zero errors appear throughout
the circuit. If V denotes the volume of the circuit (defined as Tcost ×L2 ), then the depolar-
ising noise parameter q < 1 − (1 − target )1/V – i.e. it needs to shrink exponentially quickly
with the circuit’s volume. We emphasise that this is likely a crude overestimate. As briefly
discussed at the start, one of the major advantages of sub-circuit circuits is that, under
a short-pulse gate, an error is only weakly propagated due to the reduced Lieb-Robinson
velocity (discussed further in [42]).
   Yet irrespective of this overestimate, can we derive a tighter error bound by other means?
In [42], the authors analyse how noise on the physical qubits translates to errors in the
fermionic code space. To first order and in the compact encoding, all of {X, Y, Z} errors on
the face, and {X, Y } on the vertex qubits can be detected. Z errors on the vertex qubits
result in an undetectable error, as evident from the form of hon−site from Equation (173) .
It is shown in [42, Sec. 3.2] that this Z error corresponds to fermionic phase noise in the
simulated Fermi-Hubbard model.
   It is therefore a natural extension to the notion of simulation to allow for some errors
to occur, if they correspond to physical noise in the fermionic space. And indeed, as dis-
cussed more extensively in [42, Sec. 2.4], phase noise is a natural setting for many fermionic
condensed matter systems coupled to a phonon bath [43, 44, 45, 46, 47, 48, 49] and [50,
Ch. 6.1&eq. 6.17].
   How can we exploit the encoding’s error mapping properties? Under the assumption
that X, Y and Z errors occur uniformly across all qubits, as assumed in Equation (33),
each Pauli error occurs with probability q/3. We further assume that we can measure all
stabilizers (including a global parity operator) once at the end of the entire circuit, which
can be done by dovetailing a negligible depth 4 circuit to the end of our simulation (see
Supplementary Methods for more details). We then numerically simulate a stochastic noise
model for the circuit derived from aforementioned Trotter formula for a specific target error
target , for a Fermi-Hubbard Hamiltonian on an L × L lattice for L ∈ {3, 5, 10}.
   Whenever an error occurs, we keep track of the syndrome violations they induce (including
potential cancellations that happen with previous syndromes), using results from [42] on how



                                              17
Pauli errors translate to error syndromes with respect to the fermion encoding’s stabilizers
(summarized in Table 4 ). We then bin the resulting circuit runs into the following categories:

  1. detectable error: at least one syndrome remains triggered, even though some may
     have canceled throughout the simulation,

  2. undetectable phase noise: no syndrome was ever violated, and the only errors are Z
     errors on the vertex qubits which map to fermionic phase noise, and

  3. undetectable non-phase noise: syndromes were at some point violated, but they all
     canceled.

  4. errors not happening in between Trotter layers: naturally, not all errors happen in
     between Trotter layers, so this category encompasses all those cases where errors
     happen in between gates in the gate decomposition.

    This categorization allows us to calculate the maximum depolarizing noise parameter q
                                                   √
to be able to run a simulation for time T = b 2Lc with target Trotter error t ≤ target ∈
{1%, 5%, 10%}, where we allow the resulting undetectable non-phase noise and the errors
not happening in between Trotter layers errors to also saturate this error bound, i.e. s ≤
target . The overall error is thus guaranteed to stay below a propagated error probability of
(2t + 2s )1/2 ∈ {1.5%, 7.1%, 15%}, respectively.
    In order to achieve these decoherence error bounds, one needs to postselect “good” runs
and discard ones where errors have occurred, as determined from the single final mea-
surement of all stabilizers of the compact encoding. The required overhead due to the
postselected runs is mild, and shown in Figure 22.
    We plot the resulting simulation cost vs. target simulation time in Figure 2 and Figures 18
to 21, where we color the graphs according to the depolarizing noise rate required to achieve
the target error bound. For instance, in the tightest per-time error model (bottom right
plot in Figure 2), a depolarizing noise parameter q = 10−5 allows simulating a 5 × 5 FH
Hamiltonian for time T ≈ 5, while satisfying a 15% error bound, the required circuit-depth-
equivalent is Tcost ≈ 140—and for time T ≈ 2.5 for a 7.1% error bound, for Tcost ≈ 70.
    In this work, we have derived a method for designing quantum algorithms “one level
below” the circuit model, by designing analytic sub-circuit identities to decompose the
algorithm into. As a concrete example, we applied these techniques to the task of simulating
time-dynamics of the spin Fermi-Hubbard Hamiltonian on a square lattice. Together with
Trotter product formulae error bounds applied to the recent compact fermionic encoding,
we estimate these techniques provide a three orders of magnitude reduction in circuit-depth-
equivalent. The authors of [51] have recently extended their work on error bounds in [51],
beyond their results in [38]. We have not yet incorporated their new bounds into our
analysis, and this may give further improvements over our analytic error bounds.
    Naturally, any real world implementation on actual quantum hardware will allow and
require further optimizations; for instance, all errors displayed within this paper are in



                                              18
terms of operator norm, which indicates the worst-case error deviation for any simulation.
However, when simulating time dynamics starting from a specific initial configuration and
a distinct final measurement setup, a lower error rate results. We have accounted for this
in a crude way, by analysing simulation of the Fermi-Hubbard model dynamics with initial
states of bounded fermion number. But the error bounds – even the numerical ones – are
certainly pessimistic for any specific computation. Furthermore, while we already utilize
numerical simulations of Trotter errors, more sophisticated techniques such as Richardson
extrapolation for varying Trotter step sizes might show promise in improving our findings
further.
   It is conceivable that other algorithms that require small unitary rotations will similarly
benefit from designing the algorithms “one level below” the circuit model. Standard circuit
decompositions of many interesting quantum algorithms will remain unfeasible on real hard-
ware for some time to come. Whereas our sub-circuit-model algorithms, with their shorter
overall run-time requirements and lower error-propagation even in the absence of error cor-
rection, potentially bring these algorithms and applications within reach of near-term NISQ
hardware.

Acknowledgements
The authors thank Joel Klassen for providing the proof of Theorem 23 , and for many useful
discussions.

Author Contributions
The authors L. C., J. B. and T. C. contributed equally to this work.

Competing Interests
The authors declare no competing interests.

Code Availability
The code to support the findings in this work is available upon request from the authors.




                                              19
Supplementary Figures
             1          2         3
                   0
                  f12

             6          5         4
                             0
                            f54

             7 ...

            (a) Qubit numbering.                     (b) Hopping terms in H3 .




          (c) Hopping terms in H4 .                  (d) On-site terms in H5 .




          (e) Hopping terms in H1 .                  (f) Hopping terms in H2 .




Figure 3: Compact encoding: qubit enumeration, and five mutually non-commuting inter-
          action layers.




                                         20
                1        2        3
                    1’       2’       3’
                6        5        4
          6’        5’       4’
                7        8        9
                    7’       8’       9’

               (a) Qubit numbering.                  (b) Hopping terms in H3 .




          (c) Hopping terms in H4 .                  (d) On-site terms in H5 .




          (e) Hopping terms in H1 .                  (f) Hopping terms in H2 .




Figure 4: VC encoding: qubit enumeration, and five mutually non-commuting interaction
          layers.




                                           21
Supplementary Methods
The Sub-Circuit Model and Error Models
In this section we introduce the sub-circuit model, which we employ throughout this paper.
We analyse it under two different error models; these respective models are applicable to
NISQ devices with differing capabilities. Before defining these we introduce the mathemat-
ical definition of the sub-circuit model.
Definition 1 (Sub-circuit Model). Given a set of qubits Q, a set I ⊆ Q × Q specifying
which pairs of qubits may interact, a fixed two qubit interaction Hamiltonian h, and a
minimum switching time tmin , a sub-circuit pulse-sequence C is a quantum circuit of L pairs
of alternating layer types C = L              Ul = i∈Q uli being a layer of arbitrary single
                               Q                   Q
                                 l Ul Vl with
                                             
qubit unitary gates, and Vl = ij∈Γl vij tlij being a layer of non-overlapping, variable
                               Q

time, two-qubit unitary gates:
                                        vij (t) = eithij                                  (34)
with the set Γl ⊆ I containing no overlapping pairs of qubits, and t ≥ tmin . Throughout this
paper we assume hij = Zi Zj . As all σi σj are equivalent to Zi Zj up to single qubit rotations
this can be left implicit and so we take hij = σi σj .
  The traditional quantum circuit model measures its run-time in layer count. This also
applies in the sub-circuit-model.
Definition 2 (Circuit Depth). Under a per-gate error model the cost of a sub-circuit pulse-
sequence C is defined as
                                        Tcost (C) := L,                                   (35)
or simply the circuit depth.
   However, unlike the traditional quantum circuit model, the sub-circuit-model also allows
for a different run-time metric for any given circuit C. Depending on the details of the un-
derlying hardware, it can be appropriate to measure run-time as the total physical duration
of the two-qubit interaction layers. This is justified for many implementations: for example
superconducting qubits have interaction time scales of ∼ 50 − 500ns [52], while the single
qubit energy spacing is on the order of ∼ 5Ghz, which gives a time scale for single qubit
gates of ∼ 0.2ns.
Definition 3 (Run-time). The physical run-time of a sub-circuit pulse-sequence C is defined
as
                                           XL       
                              Tcost (C) :=    max tlij                                 (36)
                                                    ij∈Γl
                                                l

The run-time is normalised to the physical interaction strength, so that |h| = 1.



                                              22
   For both run-time and circuit depth we assume single qubit layers contribute a negligible
amount to the total time duration of the circuit and we can cost standard gates according
to both metrics as long as they are written in terms of a sub-circuit pulse-sequence. For
example, according to Definition 3 a CNOT gate has Tcost = π/4 as it is equivalent to
    π
e−i 4 ZZ up to single qubit rotations.
   How does this second cost model affect the time complexity of algorithms? I.e., given
a circuit C, does Tcost (C) ever deviate so significantly from C’s gate depth count that the
circuit would have to be placed in a complexity class lower? Under reasonable assumptions
on the shortest pulse time we prove in the following that this is not the case.

Remark 4. Let {Cx }x∈N be a family of quantum circuits ingesting input of size x. Denote
with m(x) the circuit depth of Cx ; and let δ0 = δ0 (x) := minl∈[L] maxij∈Γl (τijt ) be the shortest
layer time pulse present in the circuit Cx , according to Definition 3. Then if
                                                                
              
              
               O(1)                                             O(1)
                                                                 
                                                                 
      δ0 (x) = 1/ poly x              =⇒ m(x) = Tcost (C) × O(poly x)                          (37)
              
                                                                
                                                                 
                1/ exp(poly x)                                      O(exp(poly x))
                                                                

Furthermore Tcost (C) = O(m(x)).

Proof. Clear since m(x) = O(Tcost (C)/δ0 (x)). The second claim is trivial.

  An immediate consequence of using the cost model metric and the overhead of counting
gates from Remark 4 can be summarised as follows.

Corollary 5. Let  > 0. Any family of short-pulse circuits {Cx } with δ0 (x) = O(1)
can be approximated by a family of circuits {C̃x } made up of gates from a fixed univer-
sal gate set; and such that C̃x approximates Cx in operator norm to precision  in time
O(log4 (Tcost (Cx )/)).

Proof. By Remark 4, there are m(x) = Tcost (C) × O(1) layers of gates in C; now apply
Solovay-Kitaev to compile it to a universal target gate set.

  Indeed, we can take this further and show that complexity classes like BQP are invariant
under an exchange of the two metrics “circuit depth” and “Tcost ”; if e.g. δ0 (x) = 1/ poly x,
then again invoking Solovay-Kitaev lets one upper-bound and approximate any circuit while
only introducing an at most poly-logarithmic overhead in circuit depth. However, a stronger
result than this is already known, independent of any lower bound on pulse times, which
we cite here for completeness.

Remark 6 (Poulin et. al. [53]). A computational model based on simulating a local Hamil-
tonian with arbitrarily-quickly varying local terms is equivalent to the standard circuit model.




                                                23
Sub-Circuit Synthesis of Multi-Qubit Interactions
Analytic Pulse Sequence Identities
In this section we introduce the analytic pulse sequence identities we use to decompose local
Trotter steps e−iδh . Their recursive application allows us to establish, that for a k-qubit
Pauli interaction h, there exists sub-circuit pulse-sequence C := L
                                                                   Q
                                                                     l Ul Vl which implements
the evolution operator e −iδh . Most importantly, for any target time δ ≥ 0 the run-time of
that circuit is bounded as
                                                    1 
                                    Tcost (C) ≤ O δ k−1 ,                                (38)

according to the notion of run-time established in Definition 3.
  For k = 2n + 1 where n ∈ Z as noted by [54], this can be done inexactly using a well know
identity from Lie algebra. For Hermitian operators A and B we have
                                                      2
                            e−itB e−itA eitB eitA = et [A,B] + O t3 .
                                                                   
                                                                                        (39)

We make this exact for all t ∈ [0, 2π] for anti-commuting Pauli interactions in Lemma 7,
and use Lemma 8 to extend it to all k ∈ Z.

Lemma 7 (Depth 4 Decomposition). Let U (t) = eitH be the time-evolution operator for
time t under a Hamiltonian H = 2i1 [h1 , h2 ], where h1 and h2 anti-commute and both square
to identity. For 0 ≤ δ ≤ π/2 or π ≤ δ ≤ 3π/2, U (t) can be decomposed as

                                    U (t) = eit1 h1 eit2 h2 eit2 h1 eit1 h2             (40)

with pulse times t1 , t2 given by
                                                      p            !
                       1              1                 sin(2t)
                   t1 = tan−1                  , ±                   + πc               (41)
                       2       sin(t) + cos(t)     sin(t) + cos(t)
                       1                                  
                   t2 = tan−1 cos(t) − sin(t), ∓ sin(2t) + πc,
                                                 p
                                                                                        (42)
                       2
where c ∈ Z, and corresponding signs are taken in the two expressions.
  For π/2 ≤ t ≤ π or 3π/2 ≤ t ≤ 2π, U (t) can be decomposed as

                                U (t) = eit1 h1 eit2 h2 e−it2 h1 e−it1 h2               (43)

with pulse times t1 , t2 given by
                                                    p              !
                       1              1                − sin(2t)
                   t1 = tan−1                  , ±                   + πc               (44)
                       2       cos(t) − sin(t)     cos(t) − sin(t)
                       1                                     
                   t2 = tan−1 sin(t) + cos(t), ± − sin(2t) + πc,
                                                 p
                                                                                        (45)
                       2
where c ∈ Z, and corresponding signs are taken in the two expressions.



                                                      24
Proof. Follows similarly to Lemma 27.

Lemma 8 (Depth 5 Decomposition). Let U (t) be the time-evolution operator for time t
under a Hamiltonian H = 2i1 [h1 , h2 ]. If h1 and h2 anti-commute and both square to identity,
then U (t) can be decomposed as

                                U (t) = eit1 h2 e−iφh1 eit2 h2 eiφh1 eit1 h2                    (46)

with pulse times t1 , t2 , φ given by
          1        √                                                     
     t1 = tan−1 ± 2 sec(t) csc(2φ) cos(2t) − cos(4φ), −2 tan(t) cot(2φ) + πc
                                          p
                                                                                                (47)
          2                                                        !
                               p
                      csc(2φ)    cos(2t) − cos(4φ)
     t2 = tan−1 ±                   √              , sin(t) csc(2φ) + 2πc                       (48)
                                      2
where c ∈ Z, and corresponding signs are taken in the two expressions.

Proof. Follows similarly to Lemma 27.

Pulse-Time Bounds on Analytic Decompositions
In our later analysis we apply these methods to the interactions in the Fermi-Hubbard
Hamiltonian. Depending on the fermionic encoding used, these interaction terms are at
most 3-local or 4-local. Figure 5 depicts exactly how Lemmas 7 and 8 are used to decompose
3-local and 4-local interactions of the form Z ⊗k .
   We establish bounds on the run-time (Definition 3) of these circuits. The exact run-time
of the circuit Ca – defined in Figure 5a – follows directly from Definition 3 as

                                 Tcost (Ca (t)) = 2|ta1 (t)| + 2|ta2 (t)|.                      (49)

We have labelled the functions ti (t) from Lemma 7 as tai (t) in order to distinguish them
from those given in Lemma 8, which are now labelled tbi (t). This is to avoid confusion when
using both identities in the one circuit, such as in circuit Cb where we use Lemma 7 to
decompose the remaining 3-local gates.
   The exact run-time of the circuit Cb – defined in Figure 5b – is left in terms of Tcost (Ca )
and again follows directly from Definition 3 as

              Tcost (Cb (t, φ)) = 2 Tcost (Ca (tb1 (t, φ))) + Tcost (Ca (tb2 (t, φ))) + 2|φ|.   (50)

Lemmas 9 and 10 bound these two functions and determine the optimal choice of the free
pulse-time φ. Inserting these bounds into the above Tcost expressions gives
                                              √
                                             2 2t C = C
                                                           a
                              Tcost (C(t)) ≤   √
                                               3
                                                             .                   (51)
                                             7 t C = Cb

As Z ⊗k is equivalent to any k-local Pauli term up to single qubit rotations, these bounds
hold for any three or four local Pauli interactions.



                                                    25
                                           a                                   a
                                         eit1 ZX                          eit2 ZX
                  itZ ⊗3
                  e         =
                                                           a                                a
                                                        eit2 Y Z                        eit1 Y Z


(a) Circuit Ca . The pulse times tai (t) are defined in Lemma 7 and the run-time is bounded as
                      √
    Tcost (Ca (t)) ≤ 2 2t.



                                               e−iφZX                               eiφZX
             ⊗4
      eitZ            =
                                b                                    b                               b
                             eit1 Y ZZ                             eit2 Y ZZ                       eit1 Y ZZ



(b) Circuit Cb . The pulse times tbi (t) are defined in Lemma 8. The three local gates are further
                                                                                √ 1/3
    decomposed using Lemma 7, though this is not shown here. If φ = 41 (3 + 2 2)t        then the
                                             √3
    run-time is bounded as Tcost (Cb (t)) ≤ 7 t.

Figure 5: The definitions of circuits Ca (t) and Cb (t) – which respectively generate evolution
          under a three and four local Pauli interaction for target time t ≥ 0.


Lemma 9. Let H be as in Lemma 7. For 0 ≤ t ≤ π/2, the pulse times ti in Lemma 7 can
be bounded by
                                               r
                                                 t
                                       |t1 | ≤                                 (52)
                                                 2
                                               √
                               |t2 | + |t1 | ≤ 2t.                             (53)

Proof. Choosing the negative t1 (t) and corresponding t2 (t) solution from Lemma 7 and
Taylor expanding about t = 0 gives
                                            r
                                               t
                                  t1 (t) = −     + R1 (t)                          (54)
                                               2
                                           r
                                             t
                                  t2 (t) =     + R2 (t).                           (55)
                                             2
Basic calculus shows that t1 is always negative and t2 is always positive for 0 ≤ t ≤ π/2,
thus
                                                           √
                              |t2 | + |t1 | = t2 − t1 =        2t + R12 (t).                                   (56)

Then it can be shown that the Taylor remainders R1 and R12 are positive and negative,
respectively, giving the stated bounds.



                                                   26
Lemma 10. Let H be as in Lemma 8. For 0 ≤ t ≤ tc and φ = (ct)1/3 , the pulse times ti
in Lemma 8 can be bounded by
                        p          p                       √
                       2 2|t2 | + 4 2|t1 | + 2|φ| ≤ 3(6 + 4 2)1/3 t1/3                   (57)
                                                             1/3
                                                     ≤ 7t          ,                     (58)
                   √
where c = 14 (3 + 2 2) and tc ∼ 0.33.

Proof. This follows similarly to Lemma 9. We choose the positive branch of the ± solutions
for pulse times with t1 (t) and t2 (t) given in Lemma 8, and freely set φ = (ct)1/3 for some
positive constant c ∈ R. Within the range 0 ≤ t ≤ tc we have real pulse times t1 ≤ 0 and
t2 ≥ 0. We can then Taylor expand the following about t = 0 to find
                   p          p                 √         √
                  2 2|t2 | + 4 2|t1 | + 2|φ| = 2 2t2 + 4 −2t1 + 2(ct)1/3                 (59)
                                                 √      √   
                                               2 c + 2 + 1 1/3
                                             =       √6
                                                              t + R(t).                  (60)
                                                        c

Choosing c to minimise the first term in this expansion, and again showing that R ≤ 0,
leads to the stated result
                        p          p                       √
                       2 2|t2 | + 4 2|t1 | + 2|φ| ≤ 3(6 + 4 2)1/3 t1/3                   (61)
                                                     ≤ 7t1/3                             (62)
                                   √
where φ = (ct)1/3 and c = 14 (3 + 2 2). This is valid only with the region 0 ≤ t ≤ tc where
tc ≈ 0.33.

Theorem 11. For a set of qubits Q, a set I ⊆ Q × Q specifying which pairs of qubits
may interact, and a fixed two qubit interaction Hamiltonian hij , if H is a k-body Pauli
Hamiltonian then the following holds:
  For all t there exists a quantum circuit of L pairs of alternating layer types C = L
                                                                                    Q
                                                                                       l U
                                                                                          l Vl 
with Ul = i∈Q ui being a layer of arbitrary single qubit unitary gates, and Vl = ij∈Γl vij tlij
                  l
          Q                                                                      Q

being a layer of non-overlapping, variable time, two-qubit unitary gates vij (t) = eithij with
the set Γl ⊆ I containing no overlapping pairs of qubits such that C = eitH and
                                                1 
                                  Tcost (C) ≤ O |t| k−1 ,                                 (63)

where
                                                L
                                                X        
                                 Tcost (C) :=        max tlij .                          (64)
                                                     ij∈Γl
                                                l

Proof. The proof of this claim follows from first noting that for any t < 0 one can conjugate
e−itH by a single Pauli operator which anti-commutes with H in order to obtain eitH .
Therefore we can consider w.l.o.g. we can take t > 0 as we have done up until now.



                                                27
   The sub-circuit C which implements eitH is constructed recursively using the Depth 5
decomposition. We note that the Depth 5 decomposition has an important feature. The
free choice of φ allows us to avoid incurring a fixed root overhead with every iterative
                                                                                    ⊗k
application of this decomposition. That is when using it to decompose any eitZ , we can
always choose h1 as a 2-local interaction and h2 as a (k −1)-local interaction. We can choose
       1
φ ∝ t k−1 and a similar analysis as in Lemma 10 will show that this leaves the remaining
                         1
pulse-times as ti ∝ t1− k−1 . This can be iterated to decompose the remaining gates, all of
                                                                         1
the form of evolution under (k − 1)-local interactions for times ∝ t1− k−1 . At each iteration
                                                      1
we choose to h1 as a 2-local interaction and φ ∝ t k−1 . Hence after k − 2 iterations we will
                                                    1
have established the claim that Tcost (C) ≤ O |t| k−1 .

Optimality
An obvious question to ask at this point is whether the proposed decompositions are optimal,
in the sense that they minimise the total run-time Tcost while reproducing the target gate
h exactly. A closely related question is then whether relaxing the condition that we want
to simulate the target gate without any error allows us to reduce the scaling of Tcost with
regards to the target time δ.
  In this section we perform a series of numerical studies which indicate that the exact
decompositions described in this section are indeed optimal within some parameter bounds,
and that relaxing the goal to approximate implementations gives no benefit.
  The setup is precisely as outlined in before: for Utarget = exp(iT Z ⊗k ) for some locality
k > 1 and time T > 0, we iterate over all possible gate sequences of width k and length n,
the set of which we call Un,k . For each sequence U ∈ Un,k , we perform a grid search over all
parameter tuples (t1 , . . . , tn ) ∈ [−π/2, π/2]n and δ ∈ [0, π/10], and calculate the parameter
tuple ((U ), Tcost ), where Tcost is given in Definition 3, and

                                   (U ) := kU − Utarget k2 .                               (65)

The results are binned into brackets over (δ, Tcost ) ∈ [π/10, nπ/2] and their minimum within
each bracket is taken. This procedure yields two outcomes:

  1. For each target time δ and each target error  > 0, it yields the smallest Tcost , depth
     n circuit with error less than , and

  2. for each target time δ and each Tcost , the smallest error possible with any depth n
     gate decomposition and total pulse time less than Tcost .

  This algorithm scales exponentially both in k and n, and polynomial in the number of
grid search subdivisions. The following optimisations were performed.

  1. We remove duplicate gate sequences under permutations of the qubits (since Utarget
     is permutation symmetric).




                                               28
Figure 6: Numerical calculation of gate decomposition errors of the Utarget = exp(iT Z ⊗3 )
          gate, with a pulse sequence of depth 3 (left) and depth 4 (right). Plotted in red are
          the optimal analytical decompositions given by CNOT conjugation and Lemma 7,
          respectively.


  2. We restrict ourselves to two-local Pauli gates, since any one-local gate can always be
     absorbed by conjugations, and

  3. We remove mirror-symmetric sequences (since Paulis are self-adjoint).

  4. For n > 4 we switch to performing a random sampling algorithm instead of grid search,
     since the number of grid points becomes too large.

  Results for k = 3 and n = 3, 4, 5 are plotted in Figures 6 and 7.         As can be seen
(plotted as red line), for n = 3 the optimal zero-error decomposition has Tcost = π + δ from
CNOT conjugation. For n = 4, the optimal decomposition is given by the implicitly-defined
                                        √
solution in Lemma 7, with a Tcost ∝ δ dependence. For the depth 5 sequences, it appears
that the same optimality as for depth 4 holds. In contrast to n = 3 and n = 4, there is now
a zero error solution for all Tcost greater than the optimum threshold.




                                              29
Figure 7: Numerical calculation of gate decomposition errors of the Utarget = exp(iT Z ⊗3 )
          gate, with a pulse sequence of depth 5. Plotted in red is the optimal analytical
          decompositions given for a depth 4 sequence in Lemma 7; the blue lines are an
          overlay over the optimal depth 4 sequences from Figure 6.


Suzuki-Trotter Formulae Error Bounds
Existing Trotter Bounds
Trotter error bounds have seen a spate of dramatic and very exciting improvements in the
past few years [23, 38, 51]. However, among these recent improvements we could not find a
bound that was exactly suited to our purpose.
   We wanted bounds which took into account the commutation relations between interac-
tions in the Hamiltonian, as we know this leads to tighter error bounds [38] [23]. However,
we needed exact constants in the error bound when applied to 2D lattice Hamiltonians, such
as the 2D Fermi-Hubbard model. For this reason we could not directly apply the results of
[38] which only explicitly obtains constants for 1D lattice Hamiltonians.
   Additionally, we needed to be able to straightforwardly compute the bound for any higher
order Trotter formula. This ruled out using the commutator bounds of [23] as they become
difficult to compute at higher orders. Furthermore these bounds require each Trotter layer
to consist of a single interaction, meaning we wouldn’t be able to exploit the result of
Theorem 23.
   We followed the notation and adapted the methods of [38] to derive bounds that meet the
above criteria. Additionally we incorporate our own novel methods to tighten our bounds
in Corollaries 16 and 22 and Theorem 23.
   The authors of [38] have recently extended their work further in [51]. We have not yet
seen whether they will further tighten our analysis, though we are keen to do this in future
work.




                                            30
Hamiltonian Simulation by Trotterisation
In this section we derive our bounds for Trotter error. The standard approach to imple-
                                                              P
menting time-evolution under a local Hamiltonian H = i hi on a quantum computer is
to “Trotterise” the time evolution operator U (T ) = e−iHT . Assuming that the Hamil-
                                                                      PM
tonian breaks up into M mutually non-commuting layers H =                i=1 Hi – i.e. such that
∀i 6= j [Hi , Hj ] 6= 0 – Trotterizing in its basic form means expanding

                                 T /δ M
                                 YY
             U (T ) := e−iHT =             e−iHi δ + R1 (T, δ) = P1 (δ)T /δ + R1 (T, δ)    (66)
                                 n=1 i=1


and then implementing the approximation P1 (δ)T /δ as a quantum circuit. Here R1 (T, δ)
denotes the error term remaining from the approximate decomposition into a product of
individual terms. R1 (T, δ) := U (T ) − P1 (δ)T /δ is simply defined as the difference to the
exact evolution U (T ). For M mutually non-commuting layers of interactions Hi , we must
perform M sequential layers per Trotter step.
  Equation (66) is an example of a first-order product formula, and is derived from the
Baker-Campbell-Hausdorff identity
                                                                         h       i1/δ
            eA+B = eA eB e[A,B]/2 · · ·     and       eA+B = e(δA+δB)/δ = eδA+δB      .    (67)

Choosing δ small in Equation (66) means that corrections for every factor in this formula
come in at O δ 2 i.e. in the form of a commutator, and since we have to perform 1/δ many
                  

rounds of the sequence eδA eδB the overall error scales roughly as O (δ).
   Since its introduction in [13], there have been a series of improvements, yielding higher-
order expansions with more favourable error scaling. For a historical overview of the use
of Suzuki-Trotter formulas in the context of Hamiltonian simulation, we direct the reader
to the extensive overview given in [55, sec. 2.2.1]. In the following, we discuss the most
recent developments for higher order product formulas, and analyse whether they yield an
improved overall time and error scaling with respect to our introduced cost model.
   To obtain higher-order expansions, Suzuki et. al. derived an iterative expression for prod-
uct formulas in [39, 40]. For the (2k)th order, it reads [38]
                               M
                               Y                1
                                                Y
                                     −iHj δ/2
                   P2 (δ) :=         e                e−iHj δ/2 ,                          (68)
                               j=1              j=M

                  P2k (δ) := P2k−2 (ak δ)2 P2k−2 ((1 − 4ak )δ) P2k−2 (ak δ)2 ,             (69)

where the coefficients are given by ak := 1/ 4 − 41/(2k−1) . The product limits indicate in
                                                          

which order the product is to be taken. The terms in the product run from right to left, as
gates in a circuit would be applied, so that L
                                            Q
                                              j=1 Aj = AL · · · A1 .




                                                      31
Error Analysis of Higher-Order Formulae
We need an expression for the error Rp (T, δ) arising from approximating the exact evolution
U (T ) by a pth order product formula Pp (δ) repeated T /δ times. As a first step, we bring
the latter into the form:
                                  S
                                  Y
                     Pp (δ) :=          Pp,j (δ) = Pp,S (δ) . . . Pp,2 (δ) Pp,1 (δ) ,    (70)
                                  j=1
                                  M
                                  Y
                    Pp,j (δ) :=         Uij (δ)       where Uij (δ) := e−iδbji Hi .      (71)
                                  i=1

As before, M denotes the number of non-commuting layers of interactions in the local
Hamiltonian. S = Sp is the number of stages; the number of Pp,j (δ) in a pth order decom-
position from Equation (68) or Equation (69). Here we note that we count a single stage as
either M
       Q                Q1
         i=1 Uij (δ) or  i=M Uij (δ), so that a second order formula is composed of 2 stages.

Lemma 12. For a pth -order decomposition with p = 1 or p = 2k, k ≥ 1, we have
PS
  j=1 bji (p) = 1 for all i = 1, . . . , M . Furthermore, the Trotter coefficients bji satisfy
                                        
                                        1
                                                                    p=1
                      max{|bji |} ≤ Bp ≤ 1  2 k−1                                      (72)
                       ij               
                                                                    p = 2k, k ≥ 1
                                          2 3

where
                                  
                                  1                           p=1
                                  
                                  
                         Bp := 12                              p=2                       (73)
                              
                               1 Qk
                              
                                2  i=2 (1 − 4ai )              p = 2k, k ≥ 2.

Proof. The first claim is obviously true for the first order formula in Equation (66). For
higher orders, by [38, Th. 3] and Equation (66), we have that the first derivative
                                                                M
                                   ∂                  X
                                      Pp (x)     = −i   Hi .                             (74)
                                   ∂x        x=0               i=1

Similarly, from Equations (68) and (69), we have that
                                            S     M                         S   M
                 ∂               ∂ YY                  XX
                    Pp (x)     =      Uij (x)     = −i    bji Hi .                       (75)
                 ∂x        x=0   ∂x           x=0
                                           j=1 i=1                         j=1 i=1

Equating both expressions for the first derivative of Pp (x) at x = 0 and realising that they
have to hold for any Hi yields the claim.
  The second claim is again obviously true for a first order expansion, and follows immedi-
ately from Equation (68) for p = 2. Expanding Equation (69) for P2k (δ) all the way down



                                                       32
to a product of P2 terms, the argument of each of the resulting factors will be a product of
k − 1 terms of ak0 or 1 − 4ak0 for k 0 ≤ k. We further note that for k ≥ 2, |ak | ≤ |1 − 4ak |,
as well as |ak | ≤ 1/2 and |1 − 4ak | ≤ 2/3, which can be shown easily. The bji can thus be
upper-bounded by Bp , which in turn is upper-bounded by (1/2) (2/3)k−1 – where the final
factor of (1/2) is obtained from the definition of P2 .

  Since we are working with a fixed product formula order p for the remainder of this
section, we will drop the order subscript in the following and write Pp = P, Rp = R for
simplicity. Assuming kHi k ≤ Λ for all i = 1, . . . , M , and setting the error

                        p (T, δ) := kR (T, δ) k = kU (T ) − P (δ)T /δ k,                  (76)

we can derive an expression for the pth order error term. First, note that approximation
errors in circuits accumulate at most linearly in Equation (76). Thus it suffices to analyse
a single δ step of the approximation, i.e. U (δ) = P (δ) + R (δ, δ). Then

                             p (δ) := p (δ, δ) = kU (δ) − P (δ) k                        (77)

so that
                                                T
                                     p (T, δ) ≤  p (δ) .                              (78)
                                                δ
We will denote p (δ) simply by  in the following.
  To obtain a bound on P (δ), we apply the variation of constants formula with the condition
that P (0) = I, which always holds. As in [38, sec. 3.2], for δ ≥ 0, we obtain
                                                     Z δ
                                             −iδH
                   P (δ) = U (δ) + R (δ) = e      +       e−i(δ−τ )H R (τ ) dτ          (79)
                                                         0

where the integrand R (τ ) is defined as
                                           d
                              R (τ ) :=      P (τ ) − (−iH) P (τ ) .                       (80)
                                          dτ
   Now, if P (δ) is accurate up to pth order – meaning that R (δ) = O δ p+1 – it holds
                                                                                  

that the integrand R (δ) = O (δ p ). This allows us to restrict its partial derivatives, as the
following shows.
Lemma 13. For a product formula accurate up to pth order – i.e. for which R (δ) = O (δ p )
– the partial derivatives ∂τj R (0) = 0 for all 0 ≤ j ≤ p − 1.
Proof. We note that R (δ) is analytic, which means that we can expand it as a Taylor
series R (δ) = ∞          i
               P
                  j=0 aj δ . We proceed by induction. If a0 6= 0, then clearly R (0) 6= 0, which
contradicts the assumption that R (δ) is accurate up to pth order. Now assume for induction
that ∀j < j 0 < p − 1 : aj = 0 and aj 0 6= 0. Then
                                             ∞
                           R (δ)           X             δ→0
                              j 0 = aj 0 +   ai+j 0 T i −−−→ aj 0 6= 0,                    (81)
                            T
                                            i=1

which again contradicts that R (0) = O (δ p ). The claim follows.



                                                  33
   Performing a Taylor expansion of R (τ ) around τ = 0, the error bound  given in Equa-
tion (77) simplifies to
           Z δ                                 Z δ
                     −i(δ−τ )H
     =          e               R (τ ) dτ ≤           kR (τ ) kdτ                                          (82)
             0                                     0
           Z δ
                                                                                τ p−1
                                                                                                    
                                     0                          (p−1)
       =         kR (0) k + kR (0) kτ + . . . + kR                      (0) k          + kS (τ, 0) k dτ,    (83)
           0                                                                  (p − 1)!

Further by Lemma 13 all but the pth or higher remainder terms S (τ, 0) equal zero, so
                        Z δ                            Z δZ 1
                                                                                                 τp
                 ≤           kS (τ, 0) kdτ = p                 (1 − x)p−1 kR(p) (xτ ) k            dxdτ,   (84)
                         0                              0   0                                    p!

where we used the integral representation for the Taylor remainder S (τ, 0).
  Motivated by this, we look for a simple expression for the pth derivative of the integrand
R (τ ), which capture this in the following technical lemma.

Lemma 14. For a product formula accurate to pth order, having S = Sp stages for M
non-commuting Hamiltonian layers with the upper-bound kHi k ≤ Λ, the error term R (τ )
satisfies
                                      
          ∂p                          2
                                                           p=1
                              p+1 p+1
               R (τ ) ≤ (SM )    Λ        
                                        1 2
                                              (p+1)(p/2−1)                      (85)
          ∂τ p                        
                                       p                   p = 2k for k ≥ 1.
                                        2   3

Proof. We first express P (τ ) from Equations (70) and (71) with a joint index set Σ =
[S] × [M ] as
                                                   S Y
                                                   Y M                   Y
                                    P (τ ) =                Uij (τ ) =         UI (τ ) .                    (86)
                                               j=1 i=1                   I∈Σ

Then the (p + 1)th derivative of this with respect to τ is
                                        X p + 1 Y (α )
                          (p+1)
                        P       (τ ) =                     UI I (τ )                                        (87)
                                                  α
                                                   α: |α|=p+1                  I
                                                             P
where α is a multiindex on Σ, and |α| =         I∈Σ αI . Following standard convention, the
multinomial coefficient for a multiindex is defined as
                                    
                                p+1       (p + 1)!     (p + 1)!
                                       =           =Q            .                     (88)
                                 α           α!         I∈Σ αI !

We can similarly express H with the same index set σ, and as a derivative of U via
                          S              S X
                                           M                    S X
                                                                  M
                                                                            (1)                   (1)
                          X              X                      X                          X
                 H=              Hi =              bji Hi = i             Uij (0) = i            UI (0)     (89)
                          i=1            j=1 i=1                j=1 i=1                    I∈Σ




                                                             34
where we used the fact that Sj=1 bji = 1 by Lemma 12, and the exponential expression of
                             P

UI from Equation (71).
  Now we can combine Equations (87) and (89) as in Equation (84) to obtain the pth
derivative of the integrand R (τ ):
                  X p + 1 Y (α )              X (1)   X  p  Y (β )
    R(p) (τ ) =                     UI I (τ ) −  UI (0)              UI I (τ ) .   (90)
                           α                                   β
                  α: |α|=p+1                     I                    I                 β: |β|=p        I

                   (β )                   (β )                                  (x)        (y)          (x+y)
Noting that kUI I (τ ) k = kUI I (0) k, and further UI (0) UI (0) = UI      (0), we have
     X     (1)
                    X p Y           (β )
                                                   X p + 1  Y        (β )
         UJ (0)                    UI I (0) =                       UI I (0) .        (91)
                            β                               β
        J                 β: |β|=p           I                        β: |β|=p+1                   I


We can therefore bound the norm of R(p) as follows:
                               X p + 1 Y            (α )
                  (p)
                R (τ ) ≤                           UI I (0)                                                     (92)
                                        α
                           α: |α|=p+1         I
                                   X     (1)
                                                  X p Y        (β )
                                 +    UI (0)                    UI I (0)                                        (93)
                                                           β
                                    I           β: |β|=p      I
                                            
                                 X      p+1 Y           (α )
                        =2                           UI I (0)                                                   (94)
                                          α
                                          α: |α|=p+1                      I
                                                                    S Y
                                                                    Y M
                                                 X            p+1
                                     =2                                          |bji |αij kHi kαij .           (95)
                                                               α
                                          α: |α|=p+1                  j=1 i=1


 By Lemma 12, we know that |bji | = 1 when p = 1 and |bji | ≤ (2/3)p/2−1 /2 for all j, i
when p = 2k for k ≥ 1. Hence for p = 1

                                                     R(1) (τ ) ≤ 2 (SM )2 Λ2 ,                                  (96)

and for p = 2k for k ≥ 1
                                               " p/2−1 #|α|                (p+1)(p/2−1) p+1
       (p)
                           X             p+1       2      Λ                    2             Λ
   R         (τ ) ≤ 2                                           =: Cp (S, M )                     ,
                                          α        3      2                    3              2p
                        α: |α|=p+1
                                                                                                                (97)

where Cp (S, M ) is the sum of the multinomial coefficients of length p ∈ N; a simple expres-
sion can be obtained by reversing the multinomial theorem, since
                                                                             p+1
                                        
                    X             p+1
                                             = 1 + 1 + . . . + 1                    = |Σ|p+1 = (SM )p+1 .     (98)
                                   α            |     {z        }
                 α: |α|+p+1                               |Σ| terms




                                                                35
   To obtain the final error bounds, we combine Lemma 14 with the integral representation
in Equation (84).
Theorem 15 (Trotter Error). For a pth order product formula Pp for p = 1 or p = 2k,
k ≥ 1, with the same setup as in Lemma 14, a bound on the approximation error for the
exact evolution U (T ) with T /δ rounds of the product formula Pp (δ) is given by
                                      
                                      1                            p=1
                 T p+1 p+1 p+1 
      p (T, δ) ≤ δ M          Λ    ×       2
                                                  (p+1)(p/2−1)
                                                   10                              (99)
                 δ                    
                                                                   p = 2k, k ≥ 1.
                                        (p + 1)! 3
Proof. We can use the bound on R(p) derived in Lemma 14 and perform the integration
over τ and x in Equation (84), to obtain
                           Z δ Z 1
                                              τp        δ p+1
                       (p)
                  ≤ kR k      p    (1 − x)p−1 dxdτ =          kR(p) k.       (100)
                            0     0           p!      (p + 1)!
By Lemma 13, for Trotter formulae of order p = 1 we have precisely one stage, i.e. S = 1,
and bji = 1 for all i, j. This, together with Lemma 14 and Equation (77), yields the first
bound.
  The number of stages in higher order formulae can be upper-bounded by Equations (68)
and (69), giving Sp ≤ 2 × 5p/2−1 . Together with Lemma 14 and Equation (77), this yields
the second bound.

  We remark that tighter bounds than the ones in Theorem 15 are achievable for any given
product formula, where the form of its coefficients bji are explicitly available and not merely
bounded as in Lemma 12. Summing up these stage times exactly is therefore an immediate
way to obtain an improved error bound. Furthermore, the triangle inequality on kR(p) (τ ) k
in the proof of Lemma 14 is a crude overestimate: it looses information about (i). terms
that could cancel between the two multi-index sums, and (ii.) any commutation relations
between the individual Trotter stages.
  In the following subsection, we will provide a tighter error analysis, featuring more op-
timal but less clean analytical expressions which we can nonetheless evaluate efficiently
numerically.

Explicit Summation of Trotter Stage Coefficients
For the recursive Suzuki-Trotter formula in Equation (69) we can immediately improve the
error bound by summing the stage coefficients bij up exactly, instead of bounding them as
in Lemma 12.
Corollary 16 (Trotter Error). For the recursive product formula in Equation (69) and
p = 2k for k ≥ 1,
                                                               p/2−1
                       2T δ p M p+1 Λp+1 p+1                    Y      4 + 41/(2i+1)
           p (T, δ) ≤                  Hp     where   Hp :=                         .   (101)
                            (p + 1)!
                                                                i=1
                                                                       4 − 41/(2i+1)



                                               36
Proof. This follows from explicitly summing up the magnitudes of all the bji ’s obtained by
solving the recursive definition of the product formula, which can easily be verified to satisfy
P
   ij |bij (p) | = M Hp . Then from Lemma 14,
                                                                           p+1
                                              S M               S X
                                                                    M
                              X          p + 1 Y Y αij            X
      R(p) (τ ) ≤ 2Λp+1                             bji = 2Λp+1      |bji |    ,         (102)
                                           α
                           α: |α|=p+1             j=1 i=1                 j=1 i=1

and the claim follows as before.

  For later reference, we note that it is straightforward to generalise the error bound in
Corollary 16 for the case of a higher derivative R(q) , q ≥ p, but still for a pth order formula:
the bound simply reads

                                                  2T δ q M q+1 Λq+1 q+1
                                  p,q (T, δ) ≤                    Hp .                    (103)
                                                       (q + 1)!

Commutator Bounds
Our analysis thus far has completely neglected the underlying structure of the Hamilto-
nian. In this subsection we establish commutator bounds which are easily applicable to
D-dimensional lattice Hamiltonians.
  We begin with the following technical lemmas.

Lemma 17. For a product formula accurate to pth order, having S = Sp stages for M
non-commuting Hamiltonian layers with the upper-bound kHi k = ΛI , the error term R (τ )
satisfies
                               SM
         ∂p            X X p X         p−βI
                                              h
                                                 (1)         (βI )
                                                                       i
              R (τ ) ≤            (Bp Λ)       U J   (0) , UI      (τ )  .                 (104)
         ∂τ p               β
                           J β: |β|=p        I=J+1

Proof. As shown in Lemma 14,
               X p + 1 Y (α )          X (1)   X  p  Y (β )
   R(p) (τ ) =               UI I (τ ) −  UJ (0)          UI I (τ ) .                      (105)
                       α                            β
              α: |α|=p+1                I                   J     β: |β|=p          I




                                                      37
                                    (1)                              (βI )
We begin by commuting every UJ (0) past SM
                                                       Q
                                                          I=J+1 UI         (τ ). Consider this for some fixed
J in the sum of over J. That is consider rewriting a particular summand from the second
term above to obtain
      (1)
               X  p  Y (β )
    UJ (0)                  UI I (τ )                                                                  (106)
                      β
             β: |β|=p    I
              X  p  (1)        
                                                           (βJ+1 )
                                                                       
                                                                               (β )            (β )
                                                                                                    
                                     (βsm )
          =             UJ (0) Usm            (τ ) . . . UJ+1      (τ ) UJ J (τ ) . . . U1 1 (τ )      (107)
                      β
            β: |β|=p
              X p                           (βJ+1 )
                                                             
                                                                    (β +1)               (β )
                                                                                                 
                           (βsm )
          =              Usm      (τ ) . . . UJ+1        (τ ) UJ J           (τ ) . . . U1 1 (τ )      (108)
                      β
             β: |β|=p

                 X  p  (1)                  SM                   J
                                                                   Y
                                                      (β )                  (β )
                                               Y
               +         UJ (0) ,                    UI I (τ )            UI I (τ ) .                           (109)
                    β
                 β: |β|=p                    I=J+1                  I=1


Now, by inserting this into the full expression for R(p) (τ ), we obtain
                X p + 1 Y (α )                   X p + 1 Y (β )
    (p)                                 I
  R (τ ) =                           UI (τ ) −                         UI I (τ )                                (110)
                           α                                   β
                 α: |α|=p+1            I                  β: |β|=p+1                I

                    X X  p  (1)                    SM                    J
                                                               (β )                     (β )
                                                      Y                     Y
                  −           UJ (0) ,                        UI I (τ )            UI I (τ )                    (111)
                         β
                        J β: |β|=p                   I=J+1                   I=1

                 X X  p  (1)                      SM                    J
                                                                          Y
                                                             (β )                  (β )
                                                     Y
              =−           UJ (0) ,                         UI I (τ )            UI I (τ )                      (112)
                      β
                    J β: |β|=p                      I=J+1                  I=1
                         SM
                 X X p X                     SM             h                                i I−1
                                                      (β )         (1)      (β )                        (β )
                                               Y                                                 Y
              =−                                     UK K         UJ (0) , UI I (τ )                   UK K .   (113)
                      β
                    J β: |β|=p        I=J+1 K=I+1                                               K=1

Taking the norm of this expression gives

 ∂p            X X  p  SM
                         X          PSM       h
                                                 (1)         (βI )
                                                                       i         PI−1
      R (τ ) ≤              (B   Λ)  K=I+1 βK  U     (0) , U       (τ )  (B   Λ)  K=1 βK
                               p                 J          I               p
 ∂τ p               β
                   J β: |β|=p        I=J+1
                                                                                                                (114)
                         SM
                 X X p X             h                 i
                                         (1)     (β )
               =            (Bp Λ)p−βI UJ (0) , UI I (τ ) .                                                     (115)
                      β
                   J β: |β|=p        I=J+1

This completes the proof.
                                                                        PN I
Lemma 18. If every pair of Hamiltonians can be written as HI =            i=1 hi and HJ =
PN J                                 I       J                                J
  i=1 hi , where for any i we have khi k = khi k = 1 and for any fixed term h there are at
most n terms in HI which do not commute with that specific term, then
                           h                 i
                             (1)       (β )
                            UJ (0) , UI I (0) ≤ 2nβI N βI BpβI +1 .                  (116)



                                                     38
Proof. First note that
                                                          N
                                  (1)
                                                          X
                                UJ (0) = −ibJ HJ = −ibJ           hJi                   (117)
                                                            i=1

and
                                                              N
                                                                              !βI
                         (β )
                                                              X
                      UI I (0) = (−ibI HI )βI = (−ibI )βI               hIi         .   (118)
                                                              i=1

                                (1)
  Consider a fixed term in UJ (0) such as −ibJ hJ , where we have dropped the subscript i.
As there are N of these, we can bound the norm of the commutator as follows
                      h                 i            h           i
                         (1)     (β )                      (β )
                       UJ (0) , UI I (0) ≤ N Bp hJ , UI I (0) .                     (119)

Where we have also used the triangle inequality and the fact that bJ ≤ Bp .
                                        (β )
   Now consider fully expanding the UI I so that it is a sum of N βI norm-1 Hamiltonians
with coefficients upper-bounded by (Bp )βI . As only n of the N normalised Hamiltonians
                                                                          (β )
do not commute with hJ , the number of Hamiltonians in the expanded UI I which do not
commute with hJ can be upper-bounded by nβI N βI −1 . Here we have assumed that if any
of the n non-commuting terms appear at any point in the expansion (the n), then that term
will not commute with hJ regardless of whatever other terms appear (the N βI −1 ). We can
over-count by repeating this for each term expanded (the βI ). This gives
                          h                  i
                             (1)       (β )
                            UJ (0) , UI I (0) ≤ 2nβI N βI BpβI +1 .                 (120)

The extra factor of 2 comes from bounding the commutators of the norm 1 Hamiltonians
via triangle inequality.
                                                                           PN I
Lemma 19. If every pair of Hamiltonians can be written as HI =
PN J                                                                         i=1 hi and HJ =
                       I       J                                                 J
  i=1 hi , where all khi k = khi k = 1, and if additionally for any fixed term h there are at
most n terms hI which do not commute with hJ , then

         ∂p                                        N p−1 
                                                                        
              R (τ ) ≤ npBpp+1 Λp−1 N (SM − 1) +           (SM )2 − (SM )               (121)
         ∂τ p                                      Λ
                                                            
                                               p+2
                          p+2 p
                    + nτ Bp Λ N eτ N Bp
                                          (SM )    − (SM )p+1 .                         (122)

Proof. We must obtain a simplified form for the bounded commutator appearing in Lemma 17.
We can sequentially expand this commutator and use the triangle inequality to write it as
    h                   i   h                          i
       (1)      (β )             (1)      (β )
      UJ (0) , UI I (τ ) = UJ (0) , UI I (0) eiτ bI HI                             (123)
                            h                    i          h                i
                                 (1)      (β )                 (1)
                          ≤ UJ (0) , UI I (0) + BpβI ΛβI UJ (0) , eiτ bI HI . (124)




                                             39
We can use Lemma 18 to bound the first term. The commutator in the second term can be
bounded as follows:
                                                                                
            h
               (1)      iτ bI HI
                                 i
                                       (1)                  1           2
             UJ (0) , e            = UJ (0) , I + iτ bI HI + (iτ bI HI ) + . . .   (125)
                                                            2!
                                     ∞
                                     X τ k h (1)        (k)
                                                            i
                                   ≤        UJ (0) , UI (0)                        (126)
                                       k!
                                  k=1
                                 ∞
                                 X  2nτ k
                               ≤            N k Bpk+1                                                       (127)
                                   (k − 1)!
                                  k=1
                               = 2nτ N Bp2 eN Bp τ .                                                        (128)
                                                                                              (1)
Where we have used Lemma 18 to bound the norm of the commutator of UJ (0) and
 (k)
UI (0) by 2nkN k Bpk+1 and simplified the resulting expression. The first term can be
bounded directly with Lemma 18, so we obtain
             h                  i
                (1)     (β )
              UJ (0) , UI I (τ ) ≤ 2nβI N βI BpβI +1 + 2nτ N ΛβI Bp2+βI eN Bp τ . (129)

Now by using this to bound the result of Lemma 17 we obtain
                        SM
  ∂p            X X p X          p−βI
                                        h
                                           (1)         (βI )
                                                                  i
       R (τ ) ≤            (B p Λ)       U J   (0) , UI      (τ )                                           (130)
  ∂τ p               β
                J β: |β|=p     I=J+1
                       SM
               X X p X                                                         
             ≤            (Bp Λ)p−βI 2nβI N βI BpβI +1 + 2nτ N ΛβI Bp2+βI eN Bp τ
                    β
                J β: |β|=p     I=J+1
                                                                                                            (131)
               X X  p  SM                              βI                                       !
                         X                            N
             =                           2nβI                   Λp Bpp+1 + 2nτ N Λp Bpp+2 eN Bp τ       .
                    β                                 Λ
                J β: |β|=p     I=J+1
                                                                                                            (132)

To simplify this expression, we must simplify an expression of the form
                                      X p
                                                βI xβI                                                      (133)
                                             β
                                       β: |β|=p

where in our case x = N/Λ. This can be done by rewriting this expression in terms of a
derivative with respect to x and reversing the multinomial theorem, which gives
                          X p               d X
                                                          
                                                          p βI
                                       βI
                                   βI x = x                  x                   (134)
                                 β           dx           β
                        β: |β|=p                β: |β|=p
                                                               p
                                              d
                                          = x 1 + . . . + 1 + x                (135)
                                             dx |         {z   }
                                                                SM terms
                                                                       p−1
                                            = px (SM − 1 + x)                .                              (136)



                                                  40
Using this and performing the summation over J and I simplifies the expression for R(p) (τ )
to

             ∂p                                       N p−1 
                                                                              
                                p+1 p−1                              2
                  R (τ ) ≤ pnB  p   Λ   N   SM −  1 +          (SM  )  − (SM  )       (137)
             ∂τ p                                     Λ
                                                            
                         + τ nBpp+2 Λp N (SM )p+2 − (SM )p+1 eτ N Bp .                (138)



   Now we can use the preceding lemmas to establish a commutator bound for higher order
Trotter formulae. Although it is cumbersome looking, it is easy to evaluate.

Theorem 20 (Commutator Error Bound). Let H = M
                                                       P
                                                             Hi with kHi k ≤ Λ be a Hamil-
                                                   PN i=1
tonian with M mutually commuting layers HI = i=1 hi . Assume that for any i, khIi k =
                                                          I

khJi k ≤ 1. Additionally, assume that for any fixed term hJ there exist at most n terms hI
which do not commute with hJ .
   Then, for a pth order product formula Pp with p = 1 or p = 2k, k ≥ 1 used to approximate
the evolution operator under H, the approximation error for the exact evolution U (T ) with
T /δ rounds of the product formula Pp (δ) is bounded by
                                              Z δ Z 1
                             T δp        T                       xτ p+1 xτ N Bp
            p (T, δ) ≤ C1          + C2         p    (1 − x)p−1       e        dxdτ    (139)
                           (p + 1)!      δ     0   0               p!

with

                                           N p−1 
                                                               
               C1 = npBpp+1 Λp−1 N
                               (SM − 1) +          (SM )2 − (SM )                       (140)
                                            Λ
                                               
                                  p+2
                      p+2 p
               C2 = nBp Λ N (SM )     − (SM )p+1 .                                      (141)

Proof. The error formula for a single Trotter step is given by Equation (84) as
                                   Z δZ 1
                                                                       τp
                      p (δ) ≤ p            (1 − x)p−1 kR(p) (xτ ) k      dxdτ.         (142)
                                    0   0                              p!

Evaluating this using Lemma 19 and then substituting the resultant expression in p (T, δ) ≤
(T /δ)p (δ) gives the stated expression.

   For later reference, we note that it is straightforward to generalise the error bound in
Theorem 20, by incorporating similar techniques to Corollary 16 in order to sum up the
|bij | exactly, instead of simply bounding them by Bp . Additionally, we can also generalise
to the case of a higher derivative R(q) , q ≥ p, but still for a pth order formula: with these
two generalisations the bound simply reads
                                               Z δ Z 1
                              T δq        T                       xτ q+1 xτ N Bp
           p,q (T, δ) ≤ C1          + C2         q    (1 − x)q−1       e        dxdτ   (143)
                            (q + 1)!      δ     0   0               q!




                                                  41
with
                                               q−1 
                                                N                           
           C1 = nqBp2 Λq−1 N  M Hp − B p + B p           (Sp M )2 − (Sp M )             (144)
                                                Λ
                                                 
                  2         q           2
           C2 = nBp (M Hp Λ) N (Sp M ) − (Sp M ) .                                      (145)

A Taylor Bound on the Taylor Bound
Another method to obtain a tighter bound on a Taylor expansion as used on R(τ ) in Equa-
tion (79) and which can be used together with the more sophisticated commutator-based
error bound from Theorem 20 derived in the last section, can be obtained by performing
a Taylor expansion of the remainder term, and in turn bounding its Taylor remainder by
some other method [56, Rem. 4].
   We first establish the following technical lemma:

Lemma 21 (Taylor Error Bound). Let the setup be as in Lemma 14, and let q > p. The
error term  from Equation (76) satisfies
                                   q
                                   X   δ l+1
                    p (δ) ≤                  kR(l) (0)k + p,q+1 (δ)                   (146)
                                     (l + 1)!
                                   l=p

where
                                                                   X p
                         (l)
                                      X             p+1
                  R(0)         =                          F (α) + iH      F (β),        (147)
                                                     α                  β
                                   α: |α|=p+1                     β: |β|=p

           PM
with H =    i=1 Hi , and

                           S Y
                           Y M
                  F (α) :=     (−ibji Hi )α(i,j) .                                      (148)
                               j=1 i=1

Proof. The expression for  stems from Taylor-expanding Equation (84) to order q instead
of p, and integrating over τ . The last term q+1,p is then simply the overall remainder S, as
before; and we can use Equation (103) to obtain a bound on it. The bound on kR(0)(l) k is
an immediate consequence of Equation (90), where we set τ = 0.

   This allows us to calculate a numerical bound on kR(0)(l) k, by bounding kHi k ≤ Λ and
allowing terms within the two sums over α and β to cancel. The benefit of this approach
is that it is generically applicable to any given Trotter formula, and only depends on the
non-commuting layers of H.
   We can therefore derive the following bounds:




                                                        42
                                                     f (p, M, l) for l = ·
                     M    l=p             l=p+1       l=p+2 l=p+3              l=p+4     l=p+5
                     2    2               6           14          30           62        126
                     3    6               26          90          290          906       2786
             p=1
                     4    12              68          312         1340         5592      22988
                     5    20              140         800         4292         22400     115220
                     2    3               9           22.75       50           108.344   225.531
                     3    13              57          213.25      711.25       2309.47   7283.06
             p=2
                     4    34              198         980.5       4377.5       18926.6   79758
                     5    70              510         3141.5      17555        94765.3   499391
                     2    4.89745         19.5277     79.5305     442.266      2312.73   11208.3
                     3    43.6604         277.994     1880.62     16924.7
             p=4
                     4    194.476         1719.69     16226.8
                     5    610.187         6926.95     83775.9

Table 3: Trotter error coefficients f (p, M, l) from Corollary 22; values rounded to the preci-
         sion shown.


Corollary 22 (Taylor Error Bound). Let H = M
                                             P
                                               i=1 Hi with kHi k ≤ Λ for all i. Then for
                                 th
 from Equation (84), and for a p Trotter formula, we have
                              q
                              X δ l+1 Λl+1
                   p (δ) ≤                     f (p, M, l) + p,q+1 (δ),                            (149)
                                    (l + 1)!
                              l=p

where
                                                         M       X p
                                    X        p+1           X
             f (p, M, l) =                        v(α) + i   |ji ⊗      v(β)                     ,   (150)
                                              α                       β
                               α: |α|=p+1                       j=1          β: |β|=p        1

and
                             S O
                             O M
                   v(α) :=              (−ibji |ii)⊗α(i,j) .                                         (151)
                              j=1 i=1


for a basis {|1i , . . . , |M i} of CM .

Proof. Follows immediately from Lemma 21.

  A selection of the series coefficients f (p, M, l) can be found in Table 3. Corollary 22 can
then be applied in conjunction with e.g. the commutator error bound given in Theorem 20
for the remaining term q+1 (δ, δ).




                                                         43
Spectral Norm of Fermionic Hopping Terms
Let a† and a be the standard fermionic creation and annihilation operators.

Theorem 23. Let Ω = {ij} be a set of pairs of indices such that no two pairs share an
index. Define:

                                  hij , hij = a†i aj + a†j ai
                              X
                       HΩ =                                                     (152)
                                          ij∈Ω

Given a normalized fermionic state |ψi such that N |ψi = n |ψi:

                                 | hψ| HΩ |ψi | ≤ min(n, M − n, |Ω|)                            (153)

Where M is the number of fermionic modes. This bound is tight.

Proof. Consider that hij has eigenvalues in {−1, 0, 1}, since h2ij = (Ni − Nj )2 which has
eigenvalues {0, 1}. Suppose there existed a normalised state |ψi such that N |ψi = n |ψi
and HΩ |ψi = λ |ψi where |λ| > min(n, M − n, |Ω|) . Since HY , N and all hij are all
mutually commuting, we may choose |ψi to be an eigenstate of all hij wlog (by convexity).
Then it must be the case that h2ij |ψi = |ψi for at least |λ| pairs ij, which implies that in
the Fock basis |ψi = a |0i , 1j , ..i + b |1i , 0j , ..i. Therefore for at least |λ| pairs ij ∈ Ω we
have hψ| (Ni + Nj ) |ψi = 1. So hψ| N |ψi ≥ |λ| and M − hψ| N |ψi ≥ |λ|. If min(n, M −
n, |Ω|) = n then hψ| N |ψi > n which is a contradiction. If min(n, M − n, |Ω|) = M − n then
M − hψ| N |ψi > M − n which is a contradiction. If min(n, M − n, |Ω|) = |Ω| then |λ| > |Ω|
which is a contradiction. This proves the bound.
   Now we need only show the bound is tight. Consider the following state:
                                           E
                                                      †    †
                                       φ±ij = (ai ± aj )Γs |0i                                  (154)

With Γs composed of creation and annihilation operators which do not include i or j. This
state is an eigenstate of hij = a†i aj + a†j ai :

                                                   E          E
                                           hij φ±
                                                ij   = ± φ ±
                                                           ij                                   (155)

  Observe:
                            E
                                     †    †
                     hij φ±
                          ij = hij (ai ± aj )Γs |0i                                             (156)

                                 = (a†i aj a†i + a†j ai a†i ± a†i aj a†j ± a†j ai a†j )Γs |0i   (157)
                                 = (a†j ai a†i ± a†i aj a†j )Γs |0i                             (158)
                                 = ((−a†j a†i ai + a†j ) ± (−a†i a†j aj + a†i ))Γs |0i          (159)
                                 = (a†j ± a†i )Γs |0i                                           (160)
                             E
                                  †    †
                     hij φ±
                          ij = ±(ai ± aj )Γs |0i                                                (161)



                                                       44
  Consider a set of pairs of indices ω ⊆ Ω. Choose an ordering on ω and define
                                   E   Y †
                                φbω =     (ai + (−1)bij a†j ) |0i                             (162)
                                                 ij∈ω


with b a bit-string indexed by ij. Note that N φbω = |ω| φbω . We now argue that b can
always be chosen such that:
                                          E        E
                                   HΩ φbω = |ω| φbω .                            (163)

Choose a pair ij ∈ ω, the state φbω can be expressed as:
                        E
                     φbω = (δi a†i + (−1)bij δj a†j )Γs |0i , δi , δj ∈ {−1, 1}               (164)

With Γs composed of creation and annihilation operators which do not include i or j. So
                             E           E
                                    ∆
                          φbω = δi φij ij , ∆ij = δi δj (−1)bij .                  (165)

Let us choose bij such that ∆ij = 1. Noting that ∆ij is independent of ∆pq when pq 6= ij
we can do the same for all other bpq . This gives:
                                        E X                  E
                                HΩ φbω =          hij δi φ+
                                                          ij                      (166)
                                                             ij∈ω
                                                     E       X                E
                                          HΩ φbω         =          δi φ+
                                                                        ij                    (167)
                                                             ij∈ω
                                                     E       X            E
                                          HΩ φbω         =          φbω                       (168)
                                                             ij∈ω
                                                     E                E
                                          HΩ φbω         = |ω| φbω                            (169)

Note that n = |ω| < |Ω| and |Ω| < M/2 and so the bound is shown to be tight in the case
where min(n, M − n, |Y |) = n.
  If we consider the case where min(n, M − n, |Ω|) = |Ω|, then we may always choose ω
such that it is composed of a set of pairs of indices such that no two pairs share an index,
and such that Ω ⊆ ω. In this case, by a similar argument
                                           E           E
                                   HΩ φbω = |Ω| φbω .                                  (170)

  Finally, in the case where min(n, M − n, |Ω|) = M − n one may choose the particle-hole
symmetric state

                                      E                                       M
                                                                                    a†k |0i
                                              Y                               Y
                               φ̃bω       =          (ai + (−1) aj )bij
                                                                                              (171)
                                              ij∈ω                            k=1

and a similar argument follows by particle hole symmetry.



                                                             45
Simulating Fermi-Hubbard via Sub-Circuit Algorithms
Overview and Benchmarking of Analysis
In the following sections we primarily adopt the per-time error model and associated metric
for costing circuits, Definition 3. We first establish asymptotic bounds on the run-time Tcost
of performing a time-dynamics simulation of a 2D spin Fermi-Hubbard Hamiltonian using
a pth -order Trotter formula with M = 5 Trotter layers, for a target time T and target error
t . We perform this analysis for both the compact and VC encodings and the results are
summarised in Corollary 26.
    We first want to compare using sub-circuit vs standard circuit decompositions in a per-
time error model. We do this in conjunction with our Trotter bounds. To this end we
establish the analytic bounds for the same simulation task, first using the standard conju-
gation method to generate evolution under higher weight interactions using only standard
CNOT gates and single qubit rotations as opposed to a sub-circuit pulse sequence. We
choose this method as it doesn’t introduce any unfair and needless analytic error into the
comparison. We decompose the Trotter steps into a standard gate set of CNOTs and single-
qubit rotations which are gates of the form e±iπ/4ZZ up to single qubit rotations. We cost
this with the same metric using a per-time error model, but do not allow the comparison
to contain any gates of the form e±iδZZ as this would constitute a sub-circuit gate.
    In this comparative analytic expression we still use our Trotter error bounds, so Corol-
lary 25 only serves to evaluate the impact of differing Trotter step synthesis methods on the
asymptotic scaling of the run-time Tcost in a per-time error model.
    Later in this section we perform a tighter numerical analysis of both our proposal and
our standard circuit model comparison. In these numerics we compare our Trotter bounds
to readily applicable bounds from the literature [23, Prop. F.4.]. We point out that these
bounds do not exploit the underlying structure of the Hamiltonian or make use of the
recent advances of [38], [51]. However these bounds contained all constants, were applicable
to 2D lattices and could easily be evaluated for arbitrary p and allowed us to make use of
Theorem 23. We were able to compare our bounds to [38] for the case of a simple 1D lattice
and establish that our bounds are preferable for medium system sizes, not in asymptotic
limits of system size, as was our intention in reformulating bounds for NISQ applications.
    After this comparison in the framework of a per-time error model, we numerically analyse
the impact of sub-circuit techniques in the per-gate error model, calculating the circuit depth
of sub-circuit Trotter simulations. This is shown in Figures 18 and 20.

The Fermi-Hubbard Hamiltonian and Fermionic Encodings
We consider a Fermi-Hubbard model on a 2D lattice of N = L × L fermionic sites. There
is hopping between nearest neighbours only and on-site interactions between fermions of




                                              46
                      p=2 and L=10                                                          p=2 and L=200
     0.7
                                                                            50
     0.6
     0.5                                                                    40

     0.4                                                                    30
ϵp                                                                     ϵp
     0.3
                                                                            20
     0.2
     0.1                                                                    10

     0.0                                                                    0
      0.000   0.002    0.004       0.006    0.008   0.010                   0.000   0.002    0.004       0.006   0.008   0.010
                               δ                                                                     δ


Figure 8: A comparison of 2nd order Trotter bounds p (δ, L) for a 1D lattice Hamiltonian
          of length L split into even and odd layers of interactions H = Heven + Hodd . The
          bounds are our Theorem 20 (blue) and the main result stated in [38] which we’ve
          evaluated from [38, Sec. B:eq. 57+58] (red). This illustrates why we have derived
          Trotter bounds which sacrifice scaling in system size in favour of bounds with
          smaller constants in term of p. Here we evaluate Theorem 20 with Λ = L/2 as
          this illustrative example is a generic, not fermionic, lattice Hamiltonian.


opposite spin. In terms of fermionic creation and annihilation operators the Hamiltonian
for this system is
              N                                             N                       X †                
                                                              a†i↑ ai↑ a†i↓ ai↓ + v   aiσ ajσ + a†jσ aiσ , (172)
                     (i)                     (i,j,σ)
              X                     X                       X
 HFH :=             hon-site   +            hhopping := u
              i=1                   i<j,σ                   i=1                        i<j,σ

where σ ∈ {↑, ↓} and the sum over hopping terms runs over all nearest neighbour fermionic
lattice sites i and j. The interaction strengths are u and v and we assume that v = 1, and
that they are bounded as |v|, |u| ≤ r. Before we proceed we have to choose how to encode
this Hamiltonian in terms of spin operators. The choice of encoding has a significant impact
on the run-time of the simulation. There are many encodings in the literature [31] but we
will only analyse two, the Verstraete-Cirac (VC) encoding [24], and the recent compact
encoding from [25].
   We choose our encoding in order to minimise the maximum Pauli weight of the encoded
interaction terms. Using the VC and compact encodings this is constant at weight-4 and
weight-3 respectively. In comparison the Jordan-Wigner encoding results in a maximum
Pauli weight of the encoded interaction terms that scales with the lattice size as O (L), the
Bravyi-Kitaev encoding [32] has interaction terms of weight O(log L), and the Bravyi-Kitaev
superfast encoding [32] results in weight-8.
   The encodings require the addition of ancillary qubits as well as two separate lattices
encoding spin up and spin down fermions. For VC 4L2 qubits are needed to encode L2
fermionic sites. In contrast compact requires (L − 1)2 ancillary qubits and 2L2 data qubits.
The layout of these ancillary qubits are indicated in Figure 9. Note that we must also choose
an ordering of the lattice sites. This is also indicated in Figure 9.



                                                                  47
               1           2          3                                1              2         3
                                                                                 0
                                                                                f12
                      1’       2’           3’
               6           5          4                                6              5         4
                                                                                           0
                                                                                          f54
          6’          5’       4’
               7           8          9                                7              8         9
                      7’       8’           9’

                   (a) VC Encoding.                                   (b) compact Encoding.

Figure 9: The ordering of qubits for L = 2 and the layout of ancillary qubits (grey) for each
          encoding. This figure only depicts a single spin lattice. Additionally, the first VC
                           0 is also labelled by f 0 , f 0 and f 0 . Similarly for the other (VC)
          ancillary qubit f12                     25 56         16
          ancillary qubit.


  The two encodings map the Fermi-Hubbard Hamiltonian terms to interactions between
qubits. In both encodings, on-site interaction terms become
                                      (i)        u
                                    hon-site →     (I − Zi↑ ) (I − Zi↓ ) .                          (173)
                                                 4
Only the encoded hopping terms differ. The exact expressions for hopping interactions
depend on whether two nearest neighbour fermionic sites are horizontally or vertically con-
nected on the lattice. The horizontally connected hopping terms are encoded as
                                 
                 (i,j,σ)       1 Xi,σ Zi0 ,σ Xj,σ + Yi,σ Zi0 ,σ Yj,σ   VC
                hhopping,hor →                                                  ,     (174)
                               2 Xi,σ Xj,σ Yf 0 ,σ + Yi,σ Yj,σ Yf 0 ,σ compact
                                                      ij                   ij


while the vertically connected hopping terms are encoded as
                        
        (i,j,σ)       1 Xi,σ Yi0 ,σ Yj,σ Xj 0 ,σ − Yi,σ Yi0 ,σ Xj,σ Xj 0 ,σ      VC
      hhopping,vert →         g(i,j)
                                                                                          .        (175)
                      2 (−1)            Xi,σ Xj,σ Xfij0 ,σ + Yi,σ Yj,σ Xfij0 ,σ   compact

In this notation i labels the data qubit for lattice site i and σ its spin lattice. Dashed
indices such as i0 refer to ancillary qubits. These are illustrated in grey in Figure 9. In
the VC encoding there is an ancillary qubit for every site on each spin lattice. In compact
these ancillary qubits are laid out in a checker-board pattern on the faces on each spin
lattice. Here fij0 labels the ancillary qubit to i and j. There is also a sign determined by
g(i, j) = 0, 1. The details of this can be found in [25].

Choice of Trotter Layers
We group the interactions into 5 Trotter layers. Every pair of interactions within a layer
must be disjoint. Under the assumptions of Definition 1 all interactions within a single layer



                                                      48
Figure 10: The green lines connecting pairs of qubits represent a single on-site interaction
                                    (i)
           term in either encoding hon-site .




          (a) The interactions in H1 .                    (b) The interactions in H2

Figure 11: The blue lines connecting three qubits represent a single horizontal hopping term
                                  (i,j,σ)
           in the VC encoding: hhopping,hor


can then be implemented in parallel. For both encodings the five layers consist of all on-site
interactions H5 , two alternating layers of horizontal hopping interactions H1 and H2 and,
two alternating layers of vertical hopping interactions H3 and H4 . Both cases are illustrated
in Figures 11 to 14 for the case of L = 5.
   The on-site interaction terms are the same in both cases and do not involve any ancillary
qubits. They are shown in Figure 10, where the ancillary qubits are consequently not
depicted. The hopping terms all act within a single spin lattice. They are shown for the
VC encoding in Figure 11 and Figure 12 for a single spin lattice, and for compact these are
shown in Figure 13 and Figure 14
   The alternating horizontal layers and alternating vertical layers are chosen to ensure that
all pairs of interactions are disjoint and not just commuting. Note that we could have
chosen to lay out the alternating horizontal and vertical layers in the VC encoding in the
same fashion as the compact as depicted in Figure 13 or Figure 14.
   These are not the only choices of Trotter layers. In a later Supplementary Method called
“Regrouping Interaction Terms” we show that we can implement a pth order product formula
with only 3 Trotter layers. We do this for the compact encoding only as it is particularly
neat. This is despite grouping the interactions in a way where not all interactions within a



                                             49
          (a) The interactions in H3 .                    (b) The interactions in H4 .

Figure 12: The blue lines connecting four qubits represent a single vertical hopping term in
                              (i,j,σ)
           the VC encoding: hhopping,vert




          (a) The interactions in H1 .                    (b) The interactions in H2 .

Figure 13: The red lines connecting three qubits represent a single horizontal hopping term
                                      (i,j,σ)
           in the compact encoding hhopping,hor .


layer commute with one another. A combination of this and the previous results still enable
us to directly implement each layer without incurring any further analytic error.
   The norm of these layers appears in the Trotter bounds we derive. We bound these as
kHi k ≤ Λ for all i. In Theorem 23 it is shown that Λ can be related to fermion number and
this fact is used to obtain tighter bounds on the Trotter error in the numerics we perform.
We confine ourselves to a sector of 5 fermions in all our numerical calculations. We do
this both for pragmatic reasons, since the Hilbert space dimension is just large enough to
be classically hard, and because for a 5 × 5 lattice a roughly quarter-filling already implies
interesting crossover phenomena appear [57, 58]. We also leave Λ explicit in our analytic
bounds so that we can explore different parameter regions in later work.

Analytic Run-Time Bounds for Simulating Fermi Hubbard
Now we can proceed with obtaining analytic bounds on the run-time of this simulation
for each encoding. Throughout this section we assume a per-time error model. For the
recursive product formula in Equation (69) with either p = 1 or p = 2k for k ≥ 1 and M




                                             50
           (a) The interactions in H3 .                     (b) The interactions in H4 .

Figure 14: The red lines connecting three qubits represent a single vertical hopping term in
                                    (i,j,σ)
           the compact encoding: hhopping,vert .

                                            PM
non-commuting Hamiltonian layers H =           i=1 Hi , the cost of the simulation in terms of the
single most expensive Trotter layer is
                                                        
                        MT                            1              p=1
 Tcost Pp (δ)T /δ       ≤    × Tcost (Umax (H, δBp )) ×                                     (176)
                           δ                            2 × 5p/2−1     p = 2k for k ≥ 1,

where Umax (H, τ ) := argmaxUi {Tcost (Ui )} for Ui := exp (iτ Hi ) and Bp given in Lemma 12.
This follows from the definitions of the product formula in Equation (69).
  We proceed by obtaining bounds on the run-time of the most costly Trotter layer in each
encoding. This expression depends on whether we use our methods (summarised in the
main text in Equations (11) and (12)) or the conjugation method (see Equation (9) in the
main text) to implement each Trotter step.
  For the VC encoding the most costly layers will be the the vertical hopping layers H3
and H4 . As they are both a sum of disjoint terms which we assume can be performed in
parallel this is simply given by the cost of implementing a single vertical hopping interaction.
Remembering that the interaction strengths satisfy |v|, |u| ≤ r, we bound this as
                                                            r
                                                                               
                    Tcost (Umax (HVC , δBp )) ≤ Tcost eiBp δ 2 (XY Y X−Y Y XX)            (177)
                                                               r ⊗4
                                                                     
                                              = 2 Tcost eiBp δ 2 Z                        (178)
                                                    
                                                    7( r B δ)1/3 sub-circuit
                                                          2 p
                                              ≤2×                                         (179)
                                                    6 π
                                                           
                                                        4              standard




                                                51
                                           Tcost (Umax (H, δBp ))
                    Encoding    standard               sub-circuit
                                                        p
                    compact     2π                     4 Bp rδ
                                                         p
                    VC          3π                     12 3 Bp rδ

Figure 15: Cost of implementing the highest weight interaction term in the encoded Fermi-
           Hubbard Hamiltonian in a per-time error model. Decomposing a k-local
           evolution in terms of the standard CNOT conjugation method has overhead
           2(k − 1) × π/4. The overhead associated with sub-circuit synthesis follows from
           Equation (51).


The second simplification follows from both terms in the interaction commuting, thus al-
lowing them to be performed sequentially. The same is true for the compact encoding and
so we have
                                                           r
                                                                            
              Tcost (Umax (Hcompact , δBp )) ≤ Tcost eiBp δ 2 (XXY +Y Y Y )       (180)
                                                              r ⊗3
                                                                    
                                             = 2 Tcost eiBp δ 2 Z                 (181)
                                                   
                                                   2(2 r B δ)1/2 sub-circuit
                                                         2 p
                                             ≤2×                                  (182)
                                                   4 π
                                                          
                                                        4             standard

The final expressions now depend only on how we decompose local Trotter steps, either in
terms of CNOT gates and single qubit rotations or using circuits such as those in Figure 5.
The concrete bounds on Tcost (Umax (H, δBp )) are summarised and simplified in Figure 15.
  Substituting the bounds in Figure 15 into Equation (176) results in run-times ∝ O(δ −1 )
           2−k
and ∝ O(δ k−1 ), assuming decomposition via Equation (9) or Equations (11) and (12) in
the main text, respectively. As both of these expressions diverge as δ → 0 it is optimal to
maximise δ with respect to an allowable analytic Trotter error t . This is captured in the
following lemma which uses the simplest bounds on Trotter error established previously.

Lemma 24 (Optimal FH δ). For a target error rate t , the maximum Trotter step for a pth
formula saturating the error bound in Theorem 15 is
                            
           t       1/p   1
                                                                           p=1
δ0 =                      ×                  
                                               (p + 1)!
                                                        1/p  p/2−1/2−1/p
                                                              3
       T M p+1 Λp+1         beginalign10pt]
                                                                           p = 2k for k ≥ 1.
                                                  2           10
                                                                                   (183)

Proof. Follows from Theorem 15 by solving for δ.

  Now we can obtain the final analytic bounds on the total run-time of simulating the
Fermi-Hubbard Hamiltonian for each of these four cases.



                                              52
Corollary 25 (Standard-circuit Minimised Run-time). If standard synthesis techniques
are used to implement local Trotter steps in terms of CNOT gates and single-qubit rotations
with an optimal Trotter step size δ0 saturating Lemma 24, the simulation cost for the Fermi-
Hubbard Hamiltonian with a pth order Trotter formula with maximum error t is as follows
                                         
                                         f M 2+ p1 Λ1+ p1 T 1+ p1 −1/p VC
                                T /δ0      p                        t
                 Tcost (Pp (δ0 )      )≤          1     1       1                      (184)
                                         gp M 2+ p Λ1+ p T 1+ p −1/p compact
                                                                         t

with
                            
                            1
                                                                            p=1
              fp = 3π ×                                                                            (185)
                            2 p+1
                                  − p + p1 + 12 p− p1 − 32         −1
                                2 3 2           5           (p + 1)! p       p = 2k for k ≥ 1

and
                          
                          1
                                                                            p=1
             gp = 2π ×                                                                             (186)
                          2 p+1
                                − p + p1 + 12 p− p1 − 32         −1
                              2 3 2           5           (p + 1)! p         p = 2k for k ≥ 1.

Proof. The proof follows by choosing δ such that the bound obtained in Lemma 24 is
saturated and substituting this and the respective expressions in Figure 15 into Equa-
tion (176).

Corollary 26 (Sub-Circuit Minimised Run-time). If sub-circuit synthesis techniques are
used to implement local Trotter steps with an optimal Trotter step size δ0 saturating Lemma 24,
the simulation cost for the Fermi-Hubbard Hamiltonian with a pth order Trotter formula with
maximum error t is as follows
                            
                            f r1/3 M 5/3+2/(3p) Λ2/3+2/(3p) T 1+2/(3p) −2/(3p) VC
                   T /δ0      p                                           t
    Tcost (Pp (δ0 )      )≤                                                               (187)
                            gp r1/2 M 3/2+1/(2p) Λ1/2+1/(2p) T 1+1/(2p) −1/(2p) compact
                                                                                 t

with
                       
                       1
                                                                               p=1
           fp = 12 ×                                                                           (188)
                        p2 61 −3p+ p4 +4 16 5p− p4 −8
                                                              −2
                        2 3              5             (p + 1)! 3p              p = 2k for k ≥ 1

and
                  
                  1
                                                                             p=1
       gp = 4 ×                                                                                (189)
                   p2 − 41 14 −2p+ p2 +3 14 3p− p2 −5
                                                              −1
                   2       3             5             (p + 1)! 2p            p = 2k for k ≥ 1.

Proof. The proof follows by choosing δ such that the bound obtained in Lemma 24 is
saturated and substituting this and the respective expressions in Figure 15 into Equa-
tion (176).



                                                         53
         n+2       E        E         E        E         E        E         E         E        E
         n+1       E        E         E        E         E        E         E         E        E
              n    E        E         E        E         E        E         E         E        E    O
         n−1       E        E         E        E         E        E         E         E        E
         n−2       E        E         E        E         E        E         E         E        E

              2    E        E         E        E         E        E         E         E        E
              1    E        E         E        E         E        E         E         E        E
              0    E        E         E        E         E        E         E         E        E
            −1     E        E         E        E         E        E         E         E        E
            −2     E        E         E        E         E        E         E         E        E
Figure 16: Saturated circuit model with intermediate errors E, e.g. depolarizing noise E =
           Nq for some noise parameter p given in Equation (190). At the end of the circuit,
           an observable O is measured. Drawn is a one-dimensional circuit; naturally, a
           similar setup can be derived for a circuit on a 2-dimensional qudit lattice, for
           interactions shown in Figures 10 to 14.


Trivial Stochastic Error Bound
So far we have only considered the unitary error introduced by approximating the real
Hamiltonian evolution with a Trotterized approximation. However, in a near-term quantum
device without error correction in place, we expect the simulated evolution to be noisy. We
model the noise by interspersing each circuit gate in the product formula by an iid channel
E; for simplicity we will assume that E is a single qubit depolarising channel E = Nq , defined
as
                                                                    q
                          Nq = (1 − q)I + qT , ρ 7−→ (1 − q)ρ + I                         (190)
                                                                    d
for a noise parameter q ∈ [0, 1].1 Here I denotes the identity channel and T takes any state
to the maximally mixed state τ = I/d.
   A trivial error bound for a circuit as in Figure 16 can then be found by just calculating
the probability of no error occuring at all; disregarding the beneficial effects of a causal
                                                                  †
lightcone behind the observable O, and denoting with U := Ucirc      · Ucirc the clean circuit,
and with U 0 the circuit saturated with intermediate errors, we get the expression

                                 = Tr (U(ρ) − U 0 (ρ))O ≤ 1 − (1 − q)V ,
                                                       
                                                                                                          (191)



 1
     Strictly speaking Nq defines a completely positive trace preserving map for all p ≤ 1 + 1/(d2 − 1). We
      emphasise that the error analysis which follows also works for a more general channel than the depolarising
      one.




                                                        54
where V is the circuit’s volume (i.e. the number of E interspersed in U 0 ). It is clear to see
that this error bound asymptotically approaches 1, and does so exponentially quickly. Thus,
to stay below a target error rate tar , a sufficient condition is that
                                                                         
                                V                                1 − tar
                     1 − (1 − q) < tar ⇐⇒ V < log                          ,             (192)
                                                                  1−q

or alternatively
                                                           √
                                            ⇐⇒     q < 1 − V 1 − tar .                  (193)

   Instead of assuming that each error channel E in Figure 16 has the same error probability
q, we can analyse the case where q is proportional to the pulse length of the preceding or
anteceding gate; corresponding relations as given in Equations (192) and (193) can readily
be derived numerically.

Error Mapping under Fermionic Encodings
In [42], the authors analyse how noise on the physical qubits translates to errors in the
fermionic code space. To first order and in the W3 encoding, all of {X, Y, Z} errors on the
face, and {X, Y } on the vertex qubits can be detected. Z errors on the vertex qubits – as
evident from the form of hon−site from Equation (173) – result in an undetectable error; as
shown in [42, Sec. 3.2], this Z error induces fermionic phase noise.
   It is therefore a natural extension to the notion of simulation to allow for some errors
occur – if they correspond to physical noise in the fermionic space. And indeed, as dis-
cussed more extensively in [42, Sec. 2.4], phase noise is a natural setting for many fermionic
condensed matter systems coupled to a phonon bath [43, 44, 45, 46, 47, 48, 49] and [50,
Ch. 6.1&eq. 6.17].
   We further assume that we can measure all stabilisers (including a global parity operator)
once at the end of the entire circuit. We could imagine measuring these stabilisers after each
individual gate of the form eiδhi – where hi is any term in the Hamiltonian. However, as
every stabiliser commutes with every term in the Hamiltonian the outcome of the stabiliser
measurement is unaffected and so we need only measure all stabilisers once at the end of
the entire circuit. It is evident that measuring the stabilisers can be done by dovetailing an
at most depth 4 circuit to the end of our simulation – much like measuring the stabilisers
of the Toric code. It is thus a negligible overhead to the cost of simulation Tcost .
   However, errors may occur within the decomposition of gates of the form eiδhi into single
qubit rotations and two-qubit gates of the form eitZZ . The stabilisers do not generally
commute with these one- and two-local gates. In spite of this we can commute a Pauli
error which occurs within a decomposition past the respective gates that make up that
decomposition. For example, consider hi = X1 Z2 X3 . Then we would decompose eiδhi
                            1/2       1/2        1/2       1/2
first via eiδX1 Z2 X3 ≈ eiδ X1 X2 e−iδ Y2 X3 e−iδ X1 X2 eiδ Y2 X3 and then furthermore using
                        1/2                1/2
identities such as eiδ X1 X2 = H1 H2 eiδ Z1 Z2 H1 H2 . Suppose a Pauli X error were to



                                              55
                              Location    Syndrome      Effect
                                                    X   detectable
                                Vertex              Y   detectable
                                                    Z   detectable
                                                    X   detectable
                                 Face
                              (Ancilla)             Y   detectable
                                                    Z   phase noise

Table 4: Error mapping from first order physical noise to the encoded fermionic code space,
         under the W3 encoding, by [42]. All but Z errors on the faces are detectable; the
         latter result in fermionic phase noise.


occur on the second qubit during one of these steps, say for example instead leading us to
                             1/2                 1/2         1/2        1/2
perform the circuit H1 H2 eiδ Z1 Z2 X2 H1 H2 e−iδ Y2 X3 e−iδ X1 X2 eiδ Y2 X3 . By commuting
the error X2 to the end of the circuit we can see that this is still O(δ 1/2 ) close to performing
Z2 eiδX1 Z2 X3 as HZ = XH, which is an error we can detect as previously discussed. As
a Pauli Z error is equally likely to occur this doesn’t introduce any noise bias. Therefore
in cases where δ is sufficiently small, we can use error detection to reduce the fidelity
requirements needed in the device by accounting for this additional error term. This is done
numerically and shown in the dashed lines of Figures 20 and 21.
   This means that while the fermionic encodings do not provide error correction, they do
allow error detection to some extent; we summarise all first order error mappings in Table 4.
This means we can numerically simulate the occurrence of depolarising noise throughout the
circuit, map the errors to their respective syndromes, and classify the resulting detectable
errors, as well as non-detectable phase, and non-phase noise.
   This means we can analyse Tcost with a demonstrably suppressed error, by allowing the
non-detectable non-phase noise to saturate a target error bound. The resulting simulation
is such that it corresponds to a faithful simulation of the fermionic system, but where we
allow fermionic phase error occurs – where we emphasise that since detectable non-phase
errors occur roughly with the same probability as non-detectable phase errors we know that,
in expectation, only O(1) phase error occurs throughout the simulation; in brief, it is not a
very noisy simulation after all.
   The resulting required depolarising noise parameters for various FH setups we summarise
in Figures 18 to 21, and the resulting post-selection probabilities in Figure 22.

Numeric Results
We can tighten the preceding analysis in several ways. First of, instead of crudely upper
bounding the cost of individual gates we can sum these pulse times exactly. To this end, we




                                               56
use both the explicitly defined Trotter formulae coefficients hij , and also the exact formulae
for the pulse times derived previously.
   Secondly, we can use tighter bounds for Trotter error, which take into account the com-
mutation relations between pairs of interactions across Trotter layers Hi , the coefficients
defined in Lemma 12. Additionally, we obtain a bound which rewrites the Trotter error as
a Taylor series, and then bound the Taylor remainder using methods which usually bound
the total Trotter error; which bound is tighter depends on the order p of the formula, and
the target simulation time. As explained in Lemma 24, a tighter Trotter error allows us to
choose a larger δ while achieving the same error t , reducing the total cost of the simulation.
   Finally, as explained in the Supplementary Method entitled “Trivial Stochastic Error
Bound”, a certain simulation circuit size will determine the amount of stochastic error
present within the circuit. We assume that the depolarising noise precedes each Trotter
layer; in the error-per-time model we assume that the noise parameter scales with the pulse
length; in the more traditional error-per-gate model we assume that the noise is independent
of the pulse length.
   Furthermore, instead of taking the analytic Trotter bounds, we can also numerically cal-
culate the optimal Trotter pulse length by calculating p (T, δ) from Equation (76) explicitly,
and maximizing δ till p saturates an upper target error rate. Naturally, this is computation-
ally costly; so we perform this calculation for FH lattices up to a size 3 × 3, and extrapolate
these numbers by qubit count to the desired lattice lengths up to 10 × 10; the dependence
of δ0 on the target time and number of qubits was extracted from the asymptotic Trotter
bound in Lemma 24, i.e.
                                                              
                                           b0              b1
                             δ0 = a0 + 1/p        a1 + (p+1)/p                            (194)
                                          T              Λ

for four fit parameters a0 , a1 , b0 , b1 ; all other dependencies are assumed constant. We show
such numerically fitted data in Figure 17; a similar analysis was made for Trotter orders
p = 1, 2, 4, 6, and target error rates t = 0.1, 0.05, 0.01. These numerical bounds are much
tigher than the analytical bounds, but can still be assumed to overestimate the actual error:
the operator norm distance between Trotter evolution and true evolution likely overestimates
the error that would occur if starting from a particular initialized state. We found that
randomizing the Trotter layer order does not yield any advantage over keeping it fixed, and
similarly we did not obtain an advantage by permuting the fixed order further.
   Table 5 compares these numerics for the case of a lattice with L = 5 and for a sufficiently
long time in terms of units set by the lattice spacing as we assume v = 1. So for any L we
                √
choose T = b 2Lc. We choose an analytic error of t = 0.1 as there is no point making
the analytic error smaller than the experimental error present in NISQ-era gates. As the
compact encoding results in the smallest run-time we investigate how Tcost varies with t
for L = 3, 5 and 10 below. In these numerics we choose the order p which minimise Tcost at
each value of T .




                                              57
                               Trotter Bounds      Standard   Subcircuit
                                   analytic         95,409     17,100
                       VC
                                   numeric           4,234      1,669
                                   analytic         77,236      1,686
                    compact
                                   numeric           3,428       259

Table 5: Per-time. A comparison of the run-time Tcost for lattice size L × L with L = 5,
         overall simulation time T = 7 and target Trotter error target = 0.1, with Λ = 5
         fermions and coupling strengths |u|, |v| ≤ r = 1. Obtained by minimising over
         product formulas up to 4th order. Tcost = Tcost (Pp (δ0 )T /δ0 ) for per-time error
         model. In either gate decomposition case—standard and sub-circuit—we account
         single-qubit rotations as a free resource; the value of Tcost depends only on the
         two-qubit gates/interactions. Two-qubit unitaries are counted by their respective
         pulse lengths. Here compact and VC denote the choice of fermionic encoding.




                               Trotter Bounds      Standard   Subcircuit
                                   analytic        121,478     95,447
                       VC
                                   numeric          5391        4236
                                   analytic         98,339     72,308
                    compact
                                   numeric           4,364      3,209

Table 6: Per-gate. A comparison of the run-time Tcost for lattice size L × L with L = 5,
         overall simulation time T = 7 and target Trotter error target = 0.1, with Λ = 5
         fermions and coupling strengths |u|, |v| ≤ r = 1. Obtained by minimising over
         product formulas up to 4th order. Tcost = circuit-depth for per-gate error model.
         In either gate decomposition case—standard and sub-circuit—we account single-
         qubit rotations as a free resource; the value of Tcost depends only on the two-qubit
         gates/interactions. Two-qubit unitaries are counted by unit time per gate in the per
         gate error model. Here compact and VC denote the choice of fermionic encoding.




                                              58
Figure 17: Extraploated optimal Trotter error step size δ0 . The data points stem from the
           simulation of FH lattices up to size 3 × 3, for a target error rate t = 0.1, Trotter
           order p = 2, and for times T = 0.5, 1.0, . . . , 15.0. The fitted surface follows the
           formula in Equation (194).




                                              59
Figure 18: Tcost vs. target time T both without (left) and with (right) error mitigation, for
           lattice sizes 3×3, 5×5, and 10×10, for the Fermi-Hubbard Hamiltonian HFH from
           Equation (172) in the compact encoding. These plots show a per-gate error model
           where Tcost equals circuit depth, and we synthesise local gates with a depth-3 gate
           decomposition by conjugation when error mitigation is not used (left) and our
           depth-4 decomposition (see main text) if error mitigation is used (right). In
           each plot, three lines (top to bottom) represent 1%, 5%, and 10% Trotter error
            given in Equation (76), where we minimize over the product formula order
           p ∈ {1, 2, 4, 6} and extrapolate a numerical simulation of FH lattices up to size
           3 × 3 to obtain the optimal Trotter step size δ0 . The line color corresponds to the
           intervals wherein the decoherence error of the circuit is upper-bounded by the
           Trotter error of the simulation, given a specific depolarizing noise parameter q.
           E.g. the blue sections of the top line within each row indicate that the decoherence
           error remains below 1%, for q = 10     −5
                                                60 .
Figure 19: Tcost vs. target time T both without (left) and with (right) error mitigation ,
           for lattice sizes 3 × 3, 5 × 5, and 10 × 10, for the Fermi-Hubbard Hamiltonian
           HFH from Equation (172) in the compact encoding. Assuming the per-time
           error model where the noise probability is proportional to the gate lengths. Here
           Tcost denotes the circuit depth equivalent (i.e. the sum of all pulse times from
           Definition 2; all 3-local gates in the compact encoding are decomposed with the
           depth-4 method from Lemma 7. In each plot, three lines represent 1%, 5%,
           and 10% Trotter error  given in Equation (76), where we minimize over the
           product formula order p ∈ {1, 2, 4, 6} and extrapolate a numerical simulation of
           FH lattices up to size 3 × 3 to obtain the optimal Trotter step size δ0 .




                                            61
Figure 20: Setup as in Figure 18 with the per-gate error model, but we use the tightest ana-
           lytic (instead of numeric) error expression from Corollaries 16 and 22 and Theo-
           rem 20. We use a depth-3 gate decomposition when error mitigation is not used
           (left) and a depth-4 decomposition if error mitigation is used (right).




                                            62
Figure 21: Setup as in Figure 19 with the per-time error model, but we use the tightest
           error expression from Corollaries 16 and 22 and Theorem 20. All 3-local gates in
           the compact encoding are decomposed with the depth-4 method from Lemma 7.




                                            63
                                                                                                                                        1.00
                   1.0




                                                                                                              (zero non-phase error)
                                                                                                                                        0.98
                   0.8



(postselection)
                                                                                                5%
                                                                                                1%                                      0.96
                   0.6

                   0.4                                                                                                                  0.94


                   0.2                                                                                                                  0.92
                                                                                3×3 grid                                                                                                              3×3 grid
                                                                                                10%
                   0.0                                                                                                                  0.90
                         0.0   0.5   1.0   1.5       2.0       2.5        3.0      3.5                                                         0.0   0.5   1.0   1.5       2.0       2.5        3.0      3.5
                                                     T                                                                                                                     T

                                                                                                                                        1.00
                   1.0




                                                                                                              (zero non-phase error)
                                                                                                                                        0.99
                   0.8                                                                          1%



(postselection)
                                                                                                                                        0.98
                   0.6

                   0.4                                                                                                                  0.97


                   0.2                                                                                                                  0.96
                                                                                                10%
                                                                                5×5 grid        5%                                                                                                    5×5 grid
                   0.0                                                                                                                  0.95
                         0      1      2         3         4         5            6                                                            0      1      2         3         4         5            6
                                                     T                                                                                                                     T

                                                                                                                                   1.000
                   1.0




                                                                                                       (zero non-phase error)
                                                                                                                                   0.998
                   0.8



(postselection)
                                                                                                                                   0.996
                   0.6

                   0.4                                                                                                             0.994


                   0.2                                                                                                             0.992
                                                                                                10%
                                                                          10×10 grid            5%                                                                                              10×10 grid
                                                                                                1%
                   0.0                                                                                                             0.990
                         0      2      4         6         8         10          12        14                                                  0      2      4         6         8         10          12        14
                                                     T                                                                                                                     T


                          Figure 22: Post-selection probabilities (left column) and probability of zero undetectable
                                     non-phase error after post-selection (right column) for lattice sizes 3 × 3, 5 × 5,
                                     and 10 × 10, for the Fermi-Hubbard Hamiltonian HFH from Equation (2) (main
                                     text) in the compact encoding, to go alongside Figure 21. The choice between
                                     1%, 5% and 10% Trotter error is made according to the colouring shown in
                                     Figure 21.




                                                                                                      64
Simulating Fermi-Hubbard with Three Trotter Layers
Further Circuit Decompositions
In this section we show that we can actually simulate a 2D spin Fermi-Hubbard model with
M = 3 Trotter layers as opposed to the previous M = 5. First we need to introduce another
circuit decomposition in the same spirit as before.

Lemma 27 (Depth 3 Decomposition). Let U (t) = eit(cos(θ)h1 +sin(θ)h2 ) be the time-evolution
operator for time t under a Hamiltonian Hθ = cos(θ)h1 + sin(θ)h2 . If h1 and h2 anti-
commute and both square to identity, U (t) can be decomposed as

                                           U (t) = eit1 h1 eit2 h2 eit1 h1                              (195)

where the pulse times t1 , t2 as a function of the target time t are given by
                                                                                 !
                 1                    cos(t)                 cos(θ) sin(t)
           t1 = tan−1 ± p                              , ±p                        + πc                 (196)
                 2               1 − sin2 (θ) sin2 (t)     1 − sin2 (θ) sin2 (t)
                        q                                         
                   −1                2        2
           t2 = tan      ± 1 − sin (θ) sin (t), ± sin(θ) sin(t) + 2πc                                   (197)

where c ∈ Z and signs are taken consistently throughout.

Proof. Since h1 , h2 square to identity by assumption, we have

        eit1 h1 eit2 h2 eit1 h1 = I cos (2t1 ) cos (t2 ) + ih1 sin (2t1 ) cos (t2 ) + ih2 sin (t2 ) ,   (198)

and

                  eit(cos(θ)h1 +sin(θ)h2 ) = I cos (t) + i sin (t) (cos(θ)h1 + sin(θ)h2 ) .             (199)

Equating these and solving for t1 and t2 gives the expressions in the Lemma.

 We then need to establish the overhead associated with implementing this decomposition.
We will see that for a target time t, the pulse times in Lemma 27 are as ti (t) ∝ t.

Lemma 28. Let H = cos(θ)h1 + sin(θ)h2 be as in Lemma 27. For 0 ≤ t ≤ π/2 and
0 < θ < π/2, the pulse times t1 , t2 in Lemma 27 can be bounded by
                                                            t
                                                    |t1 | ≤ ,                                           (200)
                                                            2
                                                    |t2 | ≤ tθ.                                         (201)

Proof. Lemma 27 gives two valid sets of solutions for t1 , t2 . Choose the following solution:
                                                                              !
                   1                 cos(t)               cos(θ)   sin(t)
              t1 = tan−1 p                            ,p                                 (202)
                   2            1 − sin2 (θ) sin2 (t)   1 − sin2 (θ) sin2 (t)
                          q                                     
                       −1            2       2
              t2 = tan       1 − sin (θ) sin (t), sin(θ) sin(t) .                        (203)




                                                         65
Figure 23: The interactions in H1 (left) and those in H2 (right). Gray nodes represent
           ancillary qubits, all non-gray qubits encode fermionic sites of a particular spin.


Taylor expanding these functions about t = 0 and θ = 0, we have
                                           t
                                      t1 =   + R1 (t, θ) ,                               (204)
                                           2
                                      t2 = tθ + R2 (t, θ) ,                              (205)

Basic calculus shows that the Taylor remainders R1 , R2 are always negative for the stated
range of t, giving the stated bounds.

Regrouping Interaction Terms
Now we apply this and the previous decompositions to simulate HFH as encoded using the
compact encoding, using only three Trotter layers: {H0 , H1 , H2 }. The first of these layers
consists of all the on-site interactions:
                                         N
                                    uX
                              H0 :=    (I − Zi↑ ) (I − Zi↓ ) ,                           (206)
                                    4
                                        i=1

and the other two layers are a mix of horizontal and vertical hopping terms. Each has the
same form, but consists of different sets of interactions as shown in Figure 23.
                       vX X                                                        
             H1/2 := +                 Xi,σ Xj,σ Yf (i,j),σ + Yi,σ Yj,σ Yf (i,j),σ      (207)
                        2
                          i<j σ∈{↑,↓}
                     vX X                                                            
                  +               g(i, j) Xi,σ Xj,σ Xf (i,j),σ + Yi,σ Yj,σ Xf (i,j),σ . (208)
                     2
                        i<j σ∈{↑,↓}


   Now we show that eiδH1 can be implemented directly; the case of eiδH2 follows similarly.
As H1 consists of interactions on disjoint sets of qubits, each forming a square on four qubits
in Figure 23, we only need to show that we can implement evolution under the interactions
making up one of the squares. We will denote these by hi . We will label an example h1 as




                                               66
                                          1                2

                                                  a

                                          4                3

Figure 24: The Hamiltonian h1 : a sum of each Pauli interaction represented by a red line
           connecting a pair of qubits. Upward pointing arrows indicate g(i, j) = −1 and
           downward, left and right pointing arrows indicate g(i, j) = 1 (See [25]). H1 is a
           sum of disjoint Hamiltonians of this form, shown in Figure 23


shown in Figure 24 and demonstrate that this can be done. Using this labelling, the square
of interactions is given by
                         1                      1
                     h1 =  (X1 X2 + Y1 Y2 ) Ya + (X3 X4 + Y3 Y4 ) Ya                   (209)
                         2                      2
                         1                      1
                        + (X1 X4 + Y1 Y4 ) Xa − (X2 X3 + Y2 Y3 ) Xa .                  (210)
                         2                      2
 Now we will regroup these interactions in such away that we can use the methods of
Lemma 27 to decompose eiδh1 . To do this we group the terms as h1 = a1 + a2 + b1 + b2 ,
where
                                                          
                                1    X1 X2 Ya − Xa X2 X3
                          a1 = √              √                                  (211)
                                 2              2
                                                        
                                1    Y1 Y4 Xa + Ya Y4 Y3
                          a2 = √             √                                   (212)
                                 2             2
                                                        
                                1    Y1 Y2 Ya − Xa Y2 Y3
                          b1 = √             √                                   (213)
                                 2             2
                                                          
                                1    X1 X4 Xa + Ya X4 X3
                          b2 = √              √              .                   (214)
                                 2              2
  We have reordered terms in order to easily verify the following commutation and anti-
commutation relations: (i). Every ai and bi squares to something proportional to the identity
and consists of two anti-commuting Pauli terms. (ii). The only pairs of ai and bi which don’t
commute, instead anti-commute:

                                          {a1 , b2 } = 0                               (215)
                                          {a2 , b1 } = 0.                              (216)

It is easy to verify that all other pairs of ai and bi commute. This allows us to implement
the target evolution as follows

                                 eiδh1 = eiδ(a1 +b2 ) eiδ(a2 +b1 ) .                   (217)




                                                67
   Now we only need to show that we can implement eiδ(a1 +b2 ) ; the implementation of
eiδ(a2 +b1 ) follows similarly. Consider the Hamiltonian
                                                                              
                           1    X1 X2 Ya − Xa X2 X3     1    X1 X4 Xa + Ya X4 X3
               a1 + b2 = √              √             +√             √             . (218)
                            2             2              2             2

This meets the criteria to decompose eiδ(a1 +b2 ) with two applications of Lemma 27. The
first application gives the decomposition
                                    X1 X2 Ya −Xa X2 X3         X1 X4 Xa +Ya X4 X3         X1 X2 Ya −Xa X2 X3
                               it           √             it          √              it           √
              eiδ(a1 +b2 ) = e 1              2          e 2             2          e 1             2          (219)

where the pulse times are a function of the target time ti = ti (δ) as defined in Lemma 27.
Then we apply Lemma 27 again, to each of the individual gates in Equation (219). The
first gate in Equation (219) decomposes as
                       X1 X2 Ya −Xa X2 X3
                  it           √
                 e 1             2          = et1 (t1 )X1 X2 Ya et2 (t1 )Xa X2 X3 et1 (t1 )X1 X2 Ya ,          (220)

and the others decompose similarly. Now we need only apply Lemma 7 to decompose
these three qubit unitaries into evolution under two-local Pauli interactions. As Lemma 28
shows that up until now the pulse times have remained ∝ δ, it is only this final step which
introduces a root overhead. Hence the run-time remains asymptotically as Corollary 26.


Feasible simulation time as a function of hardware error rate
In this Appendix we analyse the simulation performance from the perspective of hardware
error rate, rather than circuit depth. Specifically, we analyse the following question: given a
maximum allowable simulation error tar and a given hardware noise rate q, for how long can
we simulate a given Fermi Hubbard Hamiltonian? That is, what is the maximum simulation
time Ttar such that the total simulation error remains below the target threshold,  ≤ tar ?
In Table 7 we consider this question for an L = 5 Fermi Hubbard model with target error
tar = 10%.
   When error mitigation is unused the only contribution to the total error  is from Trotter
                                                                        p
error t and error due to stochastic noise s . That is we have  = 2t + 2s ≤ tar . When
mitigation is used there is an additional contribution c from commuting errors past short-
                          p
time gates. That is  = 2t + 2s + 2c ≤ tar . All Trotter bounds used to produce Table 7
are numeric. We are considering a fermion occupation number of Λ = 5.
   In Table 7 we consider both per-time and per-gate error models, as well as standard
circuit decompositions and subcircuit decompositions. Recall that the former only allows
a standard gate set, whereas the latter allows access to a continuous family of two-qubit
gates.
   In the per-gate error model, the error mitigation techniques described in the Supplemen-
tary Method entitled “Trivial Stochastic Error Bound” do not apply, and we choose the
decomposition which yields the lowest depth circuit. In both the standard and subcircuit



                                                           68
decompositions, this implies using the conjugation technique Equation (9) rather than the
decomposition techniques of before. For example, when decomposing 3-local terms, using
a standard gate set this conjugation decomposition must be applied twice to leave us with
only single qubit rotations and gates that are equivalent to CNOT gates (up to single-qubit
rotations). Whereas if we are in a per-gate error model but allowing a subcircuit gate-set,
then we only need to decompose via conjugation once.
  Where error mitigation can be applied in the per-gate model, we decompose all gates via
our subcircuit decompositions as otherwise error mitigation is not possible. Similarly, in the
per-time error model, we always use these decompositions, as they are always more efficient
than conjugation decompositions in that model.
  We see that in the per-time error model using the compact encoding, using our subcircuit
synthesis with the error mitigation techniques they enable yields the best performance across
the hardware error rates considered. For q = 10−6 admitting subcircuit gates and allowing
for error mitigation takes us from a maximum simulation time of Ttar = 3.17 to Ttar = 896.
For the VC encoding, error mitigation does not yield an improvement. However subcircuit
gates and our subcircuit synthesis techniques do, taking us from Ttar = 2.25 to Ttar = 3.81
for q = 10−6 .
  For both encodings smaller improvements are seen for q = 10−5 and q = 10−4 . In the
per-gate error model for the compact encoding, we find that our subcircuit decomposition
techniques and error mitigation strategy yields an improvement, but over error rates of
q = 10−6 and q = 10−5 . For the VC encoding we see that error mitigation does not help.
However for q = 10−6 subcircuit gates still yield an improvement, taking us from Ttar = 1.63
to Ttar = 2.2.
  In cases where error mitigation is used we include the classical post-selection overhead.
We have deliberately capped this at a maximum of ≈ 104 , to disallow excessive post-selection
overhead. In some cases this cap is reached, indicating that our error mitigation techniques
could yield further improvement still, but at a potentially unreasonably high post-selection
overhead.




                                             69
                                                   post
error model   encoding   decomp       mitigation   selection   Ttar        δ         dTtar /δe   Tcost
                                                   overhead
                                                               3.17        0.133     24          1273
per time      compact    standard     False        n/a         0.74        0.258     3           155
                                                               0.23        0.456     1           27

                                                               28.2        0.054     520         1377
                         subcircuit   False        n/a         3.77        0.123     31          123
                                                               0.55        0.299     2           12

                                                   9.1e3       896.        0.005     179e3       144e3
                         subcircuit   True         9.8e3       89.8        0.005     18.0e3      14e3
                                                   9.1e3       8.84        0.005     1770        1416
                                                               2.25        0.155     15          956
              VC         standard     False        n/a         0.48        0.318     2           100
                                                               0.23        0.456     1           33

                                                               3.81        0.123     31          803
                         subcircuit   False        n/a         1.00        0.226     5           141
                                                               0.23        0.456     1           21

                                                   1.8e4       0.27        1.65e-6   165e3       95e3
                         subcircuit   True         8.5e3       0.04        1.65e-6   25.0e3      14e3
                                                   9.8e3       0.00416     1.65e-6   2530        1451
                                                               2.87        0.139     21          1407
per gate      compact    standard     False        n/a         0.51        0.308     2           113
                                                               0.23        0.456     1           34

                                                               3.53        0.127     28          1393
                         subcircuit   False        n/a         0.83        0.245     4           170
                                                               0.23        0.456     1           25

                                                   1.2e4       11.1        0.005     2211        146e3
                         subcircuit   True         2.1e4       1.08        0.005     216         14e3
                                                   1.6e4       0.11        0.005     22          1465
                                                               1.63        0.180     9           761
              VC         standard     False        n/a         0.48        0.318     2           126
                                                               0.23        0.456     1           42

                                                               2.20        0.157     14          929
                         subcircuit   False        n/a         0.50        0.312     2           106
                                                               0.23        0.456     1           33

                                                   2.6e4       0.000932    1.65e-6   567         96e3
                         subcircuit   True         5.1e3       0.000135    1.65e-6   82          14e3
                                                   8.0e3       0.0000140   1.65e-6   9           1440

       Table 7: For L = 5 with tar = 10% and q = 10−6 , 10−5 and 10−4 from top to bottom.
References
[1] Benjamin Villalonga, Dmitry Lyakh, Sergio Boixo, Hartmut Neven, Travis S. Humble,
    Rupak Biswas, Eleanor Rieffel, Alan Ho, and Salvatore Mandra. Establishing the
    quantum supremacy frontier with a 281 Pflop/s simulation. Quantum Science and
    Technology, March 2020.

[2] Michael J. Bremner, Richard Jozsa, and Dan J. Shepherd. Classical simulation of
    commuting quantum computations implies collapse of the polynomial hierarchy. Pro-
    ceedings of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences,
    467(2126):459–472, feb 2011.

[3] Scott Aaronson and Alex Arkhipov. The Computational Complexity of Linear Optics.
    Theory of Computing, 9(1):143–252, nov 2010.

[4] Michael J. Bremner, Ashley Montanaro, and Dan J. Shepherd. Achieving quantum
    supremacy with sparse and noisy commuting quantum computations. Quantum, 1:8,
    apr 2017.

[5] Aram W. Harrow and Ashley Montanaro. Quantum computational supremacy. Nature,
    549(7671):203–209, sep 2017.

[6] Google Quantum AI Lab, Frank Arute, Kunal Arya, Ryan Babbush, Dave Bacon,
    Joseph C. Bardin, Rami Barends, Rupak Biswas, Sergio Boixo, Fernando G. S. L.
    Brandao, David A. Buell, Brian Burkett, Yu Chen, Zijun Chen, Ben Chiaro, Roberto
    Collins, William Courtney, Andrew Dunsworth, Edward Farhi, Brooks Foxen, Austin
    Fowler, Craig Gidney, Marissa Giustina, Rob Graff, Keith Guerin, Steve Habegger,
    Matthew P. Harrigan, Michael J. Hartmann, Alan Ho, Markus Hoffmann, Trent Huang,
    Travis S. Humble, Sergei V. Isakov, Evan Jeffrey, Zhang Jiang, Dvir Kafri, Kostyan-
    tyn Kechedzhi, Julian Kelly, Paul V. Klimov, Sergey Knysh, Alexander Korotkov,
    Fedor Kostritsa, David Landhuis, Mike Lindmark, Erik Lucero, Dmitry Lyakh, Sal-
    vatore Mandrà, Jarrod R. McClean, Matthew McEwen, Anthony Megrant, Xiao Mi,
    Kristel Michielsen, Masoud Mohseni, Josh Mutus, Ofer Naaman, Matthew Neeley,
    Charles Neill, Murphy Yuezhen Niu, Eric Ostby, Andre Petukhov, John C. Platt,
    Chris Quintana, Eleanor G. Rieffel, Pedram Roushan, Nicholas C. Rubin, Daniel Sank,
    Kevin J. Satzinger, Vadim Smelyanskiy, Kevin J. Sung, Matthew D. Trevithick, Amit
    Vainsencher, Benjamin Villalonga, Theodore White, Z. Jamie Yao, Ping Yeh, Adam
    Zalcman, Hartmut Neven, and John M. Martinis. Quantum supremacy using a pro-
    grammable superconducting processor. Nature, 574(7779):505–510, oct 2019.

[7] John Preskill. Quantum computing and the entanglement frontier. arXiv:1203.5813,
    mar 2012.




                                         71
 [8] John Preskill. Quantum Computing in the NISQ era and beyond. Quantum, 2:79, aug
     2018.

 [9] Thomas Häner, Martin Roetteler, and Krysta M. Svore. Factoring using 2n+2 qubits
     with Toffoli based modular multiplication. arXiv:1611.07995, nov 2016.

[10] Martin Roetteler, Michael Naehrig, Krysta M. Svore, and Kristin Lauter. Quantum
     resource estimates for computing elliptic curve discrete logarithms. In Lecture Notes
     in Computer Science (including subseries Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence and
     Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics), volume 10625 LNCS, pages 241–270. Springer Verlag,
     jun 2017.

[11] Ashley Montanaro. Quantum walk speedup of backtracking algorithms. Theory of
     Computing, 14, 09 2015.

[12] Richard P. Feynman. Simulating physics with computers. International Journal of
     Theoretical Physics, 21(6-7):467–488, jun 1982.

[13] S. Lloyd. Universal Quantum Simulators. Science, 273(5278):1073–1078, aug 1996.

[14] Frank Arute, Kunal Arya, Ryan Babbush, Dave Bacon, Joseph C. Bardin, Rami
     Barends, Sergio Boixo, Michael Broughton, Bob B. Buckley, and et al. Hartree-fock on
     a superconducting qubit quantum computer. Science, 369(6507):1084–1089, Aug 2020.

[15] Ian D. Kivlichan, Craig Gidney, Dominic W. Berry, Nathan Wiebe, Jarrod McClean,
     Wei Sun, Zhang Jiang, Nicholas Rubin, Austin Fowler, Alán Aspuru-Guzik, Hart-
     mut Neven, and Ryan Babbush. Improved Fault-Tolerant Quantum Simulation of
     Condensed-Phase Correlated Electrons via Trotterization. Quantum, 4:296, feb 2019.

[16] A Yu Kitaev. Quantum computations: algorithms and error correction. Russian Math-
     ematical Surveys, 52(6):1191–1249, dec 1997.

[17] Christopher M. Dawson and Michael A. Nielsen.        The Solovay-Kitaev algorithm.
     arXiv:0505030, may 2005.

[18] Michael A. Nielsen and Isaac L. Chuang. Quantum Computation and Quantum Infor-
     mation. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2010.

[19] Frank Arute, Kunal Arya, Ryan Babbush, Dave Bacon, Joseph C. Bardin, Rami
     Barends, Rupak Biswas, Sergio Boixo, Fernando G. S. L. Brandao, David A. Buell,
     Brian Burkett, Yu Chen, Zijun Chen, Ben Chiaro, Roberto Collins, William Court-
     ney, Andrew Dunsworth, Edward Farhi, Brooks Foxen, Austin Fowler, Craig Gidney,
     Marissa Giustina, Rob Graff, Keith Guerin, Steve Habegger, Matthew P. Harrigan,
     Michael J. Hartmann, Alan Ho, Markus R. Hoffmann, Trent Huang, Travis S. Humble,
     Sergei V. Isakov, Evan Jeffrey, Zhang Jiang, Dvir Kafri, Kostyantyn Kechedzhi, Julian



                                           72
    Kelly, Paul V. Klimov, Sergey Knysh, Alexander N. Korotkov, Fedor Kostritsa, David
    Landhuis, Mike Lindmark, Erik Lucero, Dmitry Lyakh, Salvatore Mandra, Jarrod R.
    McClean, Matt McEwen, Anthony Megrant, Xiao Mi, Kristel Michielsen, Masoud
    Mohseni, Josh Mutus, Ofer Naaman, Matthew Neeley, Charles Neill, Murphy Yuezhen
    Niu, Eric Ostby, Andre Petukhov, John C. Platt, Chris Quintana, Eleanor G. Rief-
    fel, Pedram Roushan, Nicholas C. Rubin, Daniel Sank, Kevin J. Satzinger, Vadim
    Smelyanskiy, Kevin J. Sung, Matthew D. Trevithick, Amit Vainsencher, Benjamin Vil-
    lalonga, Theodore White, Z. Jamie Yao, Ping Yeh, Adam Zalcman, Hartmut Neven,
    and John M. Martinis. Supplementary information for ”Quantum supremacy using a
    programmable superconducting processor”. Nature, 574(7779):505–510, oct 2019.

[20] Elliott H. Lieb and Derek W. Robinson. The finite group velocity of quantum spin
     systems. Communications in Mathematical Physics, 28(3):251–257, sep 1972.

[21] Bela Bauer, Sergey Bravyi, Mario Motta, and Garnet Kin-Lic Chan. Quantum algo-
     rithms for quantum chemistry and quantum materials science. arXiv:2001.03685, jan
     2020.

[22] J. P. F. LeBlanc, Andrey E. Antipov, Federico Becca, Ireneusz W. Bulik, Garnet Kin-
     Lic Chan, Chia-Min Chung, Youjin Deng, Michel Ferrero, Thomas M. Henderson,
     Carlos A. Jiménez-Hoyos, E. Kozik, Xuan-Wen Liu, Andrew J. Millis, N. V. Prokof’ev,
     Mingpu Qin, Gustavo E. Scuseria, Hao Shi, B. V. Svistunov, Luca F. Tocchio, I. S.
     Tupitsyn, Steven R. White, Shiwei Zhang, Bo-Xiao Zheng, Zhenyue Zhu, and Emanuel
     Gull. Solutions of the Two Dimensional Hubbard Model: Benchmarks and Results
     from a Wide Range of Numerical Algorithms. Physical Review X, 5(4), may 2015.

[23] Andrew M. Childs, Dmitri Maslov, Yunseong Nam, Neil J. Ross, and Yuan Su. To-
     ward the first quantum simulation with quantum speedup. Proceedings of the National
     Academy of Sciences, 115(38):9456–9461, 2018.

[24] F. Verstraete and J. I. Cirac. Mapping local Hamiltonians of fermions to local Hamil-
     tonians of spins. Journal of Statistical Mechanics: Theory and Experiment, aug 2005.

[25] Charles Derby and Joel Klassen. A compact fermion to qubit mapping. 2020.

[26] Navin Khaneja, Roger Brockett, and Steffen J. Glaser. Time optimal control in spin
     systems. Physical Review A, 63(3), Feb 2001.

[27] Navin Khaneja, Steffen J. Glaser, and Roger Brockett. Sub-riemannian geometry and
     time optimal control of three spin systems: Quantum gates and coherence transfer.
     Physical Review A, 65(3), Jan 2002.

[28] Navin Khaneja, Timo Reiss, Cindie Kehlet, Thomas Schulte-Herbrüggen, and Steffen J.
     Glaser. Optimal control of coupled spin dynamics: design of nmr pulse sequences by
     gradient ascent algorithms. Journal of Magnetic Resonance, 172(2):296 – 305, 2005.



                                           73
[29] Nathan Earnest, Caroline Tornow, and Daniel J. Egger. Pulse-efficient circuit transpi-
     lation for quantum applications on cross-resonance-based hardware, 2021.

[30] John P. T. Stenger, Nicholas T. Bronn, Daniel J. Egger, and David Pekker. Simulating
     the dynamics of braiding of majorana zero modes using an ibm quantum computer,
     2021.

[31] P. Jordan and E. Wigner. Über das Paulische Äquivalenzverbot. Zeitschrift für Physik,
     47(9-10):631–651, sep 1928.

[32] Sergey B. Bravyi and Alexei Yu Kitaev. Fermionic quantum computation. Annals of
     Physics, 298(1):210–226, may 2002.

[33] Tien Trung Pham, Rodney Van Meter, and Clare Horsman. Optimization of the
     Solovay-Kitaev algorithm. Physical Review A, 87(5):052332, may 2013.

[34] Esteban A Martinez, Thomas Monz, Daniel Nigg, Philipp Schindler, and Rainer Blatt.
     Compiling quantum algorithms for architectures with multi-qubit gates. New Journal
     of Physics, 18(6):063029, jun 2016.

[35] Dominic W. Berry, Andrew M. Childs, Robin Kothari, and Robin Kothari. Hamiltonian
     Simulation with Nearly Optimal Dependence on all Parameters. In 2015 IEEE 56th
     Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, pages 792–809. IEEE, oct
     2015.

[36] Guang Hao Low and Isaac L. Chuang.           Hamiltonian Simulation by Qubitization.
     arXiv:1610.06546, oct 2016.

[37] Dominic W. Berry, Andrew M. Childs, Richard Cleve, Robin Kothari, and Rolando D.
     Somma. Simulating Hamiltonian dynamics with a truncated Taylor series. arXiv, dec
     2014.

[38] Andrew M Childs and Yuan Su. Nearly optimal lattice simulation by product formulas.
     Technical report, January 2019.

[39] Masuo Suzuki. General theory of higher-order decomposition of exponential operators
     and symplectic integrators. Physics Letters A, 1992.

[40] Masuo Suzuki. General theory of fractal path integrals with applications to many-body
     theories and statistical physics. Journal of Mathematical Physics, 32(2):400–407, feb
     1991.

[41] A. W. Knapp. Basic Real Analysis. Birkhäuser, 2005.

[42] Johannes Bausch, Toby Cubitt, Charles Derby, and Joel Klassen. Mitigating errors in
     local fermionic encodings. 2020.



                                             74
[43] H. T. Ng. Decoherence of interacting Majorana modes. Scientific Reports, 5(1):1–14,
     jul 2015.

[44] A. Kauch, P. Pudleiner, K. Astleithner, P. Thunström, T. Ribic, and K. Held.
     Generic Optical Excitations of Correlated Systems: π-tons. Physical review letters,
     124(4):047401, jan 2020.

[45] Xinyu Zhao, Wufu Shi, J. Q. You, and Ting Yu. Non-Markovian dynamics of quantum
     open systems embedded in a hybrid environment. Annals of Physics, 381:121–136, jun
     2017.

[46] Alexey A. Melnikov and Leonid E. Fedichkin. Quantum walks of interacting fermions
     on a cycle graph. Scientific Reports, 6(1):1–13, sep 2016.

[47] L. A. Openov and A. V. Tsukanov. Selective electron transfer between quantum dots
     induced by a resonance pulse. Semiconductors, 39(2):235–242, 2005.

[48] L. Fedichkin and A. Fedorov. Error rate of a charge qubit coupled to an acoustic
     phonon reservoir. Phys. Rev. A, 69:032311, Mar 2004.

[49] Marlan O. Scully and Jonathan P. Dowling. Quantum-noise limits to matter-wave
     interferometry. Physical Review A, 48(4):3186–3190, oct 1993.

[50] Wellington Luiz Ribeiro. Evolution of a 1D Bipartite Fermionic Chain Under Influence
     of a Phenomenological Dephasing. PhD thesis, Universidade Federal do ABC (UFABC),
     2014.

[51] Andrew M. Childs, Yuan Su, Minh C. Tran, Nathan Wiebe, and Shuchen Zhu. A
     Theory of Trotter Error. arXiv:1912.08854, dec 2019.

[52] Morten Kjaergaard, Mollie E. Schwartz, Jochen Braumüller, Philip Krantz, Joel I-Jan
     Wang, Simon Gustavsson, and William D. Oliver. Superconducting Qubits: Current
     State of Play. Annual Review of Condensed Matter Physics, 11(1):369–395, may 2019.

[53] David Poulin, Angie Qarry, Rolando Somma, and Frank Verstraete. Quantum simula-
     tion of time-dependent hamiltonians and the convenient illusion of hilbert space. Phys.
     Rev. Lett., 106:170501, Apr 2011.

[54] Wolfgang Dür, Michael J Bremner, and Hans J Briegel. Quantum simulation of inter-
     acting high-dimensional systems: the influence of noise. Technical report, 2007.

[55] Man-Hong Yung, James D. Whitfield, Sergio Boixo, David G. Tempel, and Alán
     Aspuru-Guzik. Introduction to Quantum Algorithms for Physics and Chemistry. In
     Introduction to Quantum Algorithms for Physics and Chemistry, pages 67–106. mar
     2014.




                                            75
[56] Johannes Bausch. On the Efficient Calculation of a Linear Combination of Chi-Square
     Random Variables with an Application in Counting String Vacua. Journal of Physics
     A: Mathematical and Theoretical, 46(50):505202, aug 2012.

[57] M. Keller, W. Metzner, and U. Schollwöck. Dynamical mean-field theory for pairing
     and spin gap in the attractive Hubbard model. Physical Review Letters, 86(20):4612–
     4615, may 2001.

[58] Tatsuya Kaneko and Yukinori Ohta. BCS-BEC crossover in the two-dimensional at-
     tractive hubbard model: Variational cluster approach. Journal of the Physical Society
     of Japan, 83(2), feb 2014.




                                           76
