Relaxing Hardware Requirements for Surface Code
Circuits using Time-dynamics
Matt McEwen1 , Dave Bacon2 , and Craig Gidney1
1 Google Quantum AI, Santa Barbara, California 93117, USA
2 Google Quantum AI, Seattle, Washington 98103, USA

arXiv:2302.02192v2 [quant-ph] 14 Sep 2023

September 18, 2023

The typical time-independent view of quantum error correction (QEC) codes hides
significant freedom in the decomposition into circuits for execution on hardware. Using
the concept of detecting regions, we design time-dynamic QEC circuits directly instead
of designing static QEC codes to decompose into circuits. In particular, we improve
on the standard circuit constructions for the surface code, presenting new circuits that
can embed on a hexagonal grid instead of a square grid, that can use ISWAP gates
instead of CNOT or CZ gates, that can exchange qubit data and measure roles, and
that move logical patches around the physical qubit grid while executing. All these
constructions use no additional entangling gate layers and display essentially the same
logical performance, having teraquop footprints within 25% of the standard surface
code circuit. We expect these circuits to be of great interest to quantum hardware
engineers, because they achieve essentially the same logical performance as standard
surface code circuits while relaxing demands on hardware.

1 Introduction
Traditionally, quantum error correcting (QEC) codes are defined by a static structure of stabilizers [Sho95; CS96; Ste96; Kit97]. For example, the surface code [BK98; Den+02] is usually
introduced without time-dynamics as an unchanging set of stabilizer terms to repeatedly measure.
Although this time-independent approach to QEC is appealing in its simplicity, performing quantum computation on hardware requires dealing with time dynamics. At the logical level, time
dynamics are unavoidable because logical computation applies operations changing the structure
of the QEC circuit as it is being executed [BK05; Hor+12]. At the physical level, time dynamics
are unavoidable because stabilizer measurements are not atomic operations available on hardware
[Fow+12]. The required stabilizer measurements must be decomposed into layers of native hardware operations, which cause the state of the system to vary from moment to moment as the layers
execute. While not all approaches to fault-tolerance rely on repeated stabilizer measurements,
other approaches like single-shot QEC [Fuj14; Bom15] still involve the execution of a stabilizer circuit with non-trivial time dynamics. Some recent works have begun to explore the time dynamics
of codes, including in Floquet codes [HH21; HH22; AWH22; Pae+22; GNM22]. However, these
approaches remain close to the current standard, focusing on the evolution of code stabilizers and
the propagation of errors over time [Got22].
Experimentally implementing QEC codes presents an impressive challenge. The surface code is
a popular candidate because it presents an excellent compromise of good logical performance and
achievable demands on hardware [Fow+12]. The surface code permits simple decomposition into
a circuit via the addition of measure qubits, with a resulting qubit grid requiring only four-fold
local connectivity in 2D, and using a cycle depth of only four layers of CNOT or CZ gates. At
the same time, these circuits for the surface code display impressive logical performance under
Matt McEwen: mmcewen@google.com
Dave Bacon: dabacon@google.com
Craig Gidney: craig.gidney@gmail.com

Accepted in Quantum 2023-07-12, click title to verify

1

realistic error models [Kri+22; Goo+22] and can be decoded efficiently by matching [Den+02;
Fow13b; Hig21]. Previous attempts to construct circuits with more relaxed hardware requirements
have faced significant challenges. Lower connectivity either demands unreasonable overhead in
the cycle depth or the use of alternative codes sacrificing logical performance [Bac05; Cha+20;
Sun+22]. Further challenges are presented by various non-ideal realities of hardware, such as
the presence of leakage states. Modifications to improve the code’s resilience to such effects also
typically introduce additional overhead and harm logical performance [Fow13a].
In this work we aim to provide an alternative foundation of concepts for reasoning about
quantum error correcting circuits as opposed to quantum error correcting codes. In particular, we
highlight the concepts of detectors and detecting regions as a generalization of code stabilizers to
the time-dynamic circuit picture. As evidence that these concepts are useful, we present several
circuits which are improvements over the standard circuit decompositions of the surface code.
These improved circuits still implement the surface code and so enjoy essentially equivalent logical
performance. At the same time, they relax demands made on the hardware that implement them.
These circuits were all inspired by looking at and modifying the time dynamics of the detectors in
the standard surface code circuit.
Due to the difficulty of implementing QEC experimentally, and the resulting breadth of hardware architectures aiming to implement QEC, progress is often focused on exploiting hypothetical
hardware specifics for better error correction performance. This kind of work is essentially in the
form “If hardware can do X then we could do Y”. Recent examples of such progress include new
codes exploiting strong noise bias [Tuc+19; Bon+21], long-range connectivity [BE20; BE21; BK22;
PK21; Rof+22], or hardware parity measurements [LGB10; DS12; RPB18; Rea+22; Liv+22]. Our
work strives to be of the complementary form: “Hardware doesn’t need to do X because we can do
Y”: We show that designing the time-dynamic QEC circuit directly can allow for relaxation of the
hardware requirements.
In particular, we show that efficient surface code circuits can be constructed using three couplings per qubit rather than four, using ISWAP gates instead of CNOT or CZ gates, and with
improved resilience to leakage by involving measurements on all physical qubits. All three of these
exemplar circuits represent an improvement over the state of the art, performing the surface code
with essentially the same logical performance, and maintaining the use of only four layers of entangling gates rather than adding overhead in circuit depth. The improvements shown in each of
these circuits are not mutually exclusive or exhaustive. We also discuss combining the improvements from these constructions, as well as benefits they provide beyond relaxing requirements on
hardware such as enabling lower cost logical compilation. That the existence of these circuits is
surprising speaks to the usefulness of directly constructing QEC circuits rather than QEC codes.

1.1 Organization
This paper is organised as follows: In Section 2, we provide some background on approaching
fault-tolerant circuits using detecting regions, and the tools we used to explore those concepts and
make the following constructions. We also discuss relevant hardware constraints that motivate
our constructions. In the next three sections, we present our major results in the form of three
improved circuits for the surface code: In Section 3, we provide circuits for a hex-grid, requiring
only three couplings per qubit to implement the surface code. In Section 4, we provide circuits that
use ISWAP gates to perform the surface code. In Section 5, we provide circuits for the surface code
that exchange the roles of data and measure qubits in each cycle. In all three cases, we explain the
circuit construction in terms of detecting regions, and rigorously benchmark the performance of
each circuit, demonstrating essentially the same logical performance as the standard surface code.
Finally, in Section 6, we discuss combining these constructions, present a table of all 24 included
circuit constructions, and provide some outlook and commentary on future constructions using
these concepts.
Following the main text, we provide several appendices discussing parts of our work in more
detail. In Appendix A we provide more rigorous definitions regarding the propagation of detecting
regions. In Appendix B, we present the equivalent of two of our results in the repetition code
for pedagogical purposes. In Appendix C, we discuss an applications of the walking surface code
circuits beyond relaxing hardware requirements, in improving logical circuit compilation. In Ap-

Accepted in Quantum 2023-07-12, click title to verify

2

pendix D, we detail the methodology we used for numerically benchmarking our constructions,
including detailing the noise models used. In Appendix E, we provide summary benchmarking of
all our constructions. Finally, in Appendix F, we provide some convenient links for opening circuits
for our constructions in an online interactive tool.
Finally, we also provide a set of supplementary figures available as an ancillary file with this
work, including visualization of each circuit we benchmark along with more traditional plots
of error correction performance. This file can also be found in our data repository found at
zenodo.org/record/7587578 [MBG23], along with a full description of each circuit we benchmarked, the results of our benchmarking, and all major assets used in this paper. The code
used to produce the circuits, perform the benchmarking, and make figures is available in our code
repository at https://github.com/Strilanc/midout.

2 Concepts and Tools
Fault-tolerance is the property that a circuit overall can be more reliable than the faulty gates that
make it up. This is a very desirable property for circuits we want to run on hardware, where noisy
gates might otherwise limit our chances of success to unacceptably low levels. When a QEC code
is described as fault-tolerant, we usually mean that it provides us some strategy to make faulttolerant circuits. The task of constructing fault-tolerant circuits is often approached in this way:
First, choosing code stabilizers; second, producing a cycle circuit that measures those stabilizers;
third, repeating that cycle circuit to build a locally fault-tolerant circuit chunk implementing the
code; and fourth, applying some strategy to execute logical computation without disturbing that
local fault-tolerance. In this section, we aim to introduce an alternative paradigm for approaching
fault-tolerant circuits more directly than via choosing stabilizers, without disturbing the desirable
properties of codes or requiring a new strategy for decoding or logical computation.
We start by recasting the typical approach to static stabilizer codes in terms of propagating
stabilizers in the circuit, highlighting how the state of the system changes as the stabilizers are
measured by the cycle circuit. We then introduce the concepts of detectors and detecting regions,
using the same propagation rules to understand the sensitivity of the circuit to errors. Finally,
we use these concepts to address the fault-tolerance of the circuit directly, rather than via the
measurements of stabilizers. We argue that detecting regions are a useful primitive to not only the
stabilizers but other key concepts in QEC as well. This explanation aims to be pedagogical and
rooted in the circuit picture, but we provide more rigorous definitions in Appendix A.
Following this, we discuss the software tools we used in exploring these constructions and some
of the relevant hardware constraints that motivated us in constructing new circuits.

2.1 Mid-cycle states
The stabilizer formalism [Got97] permits analysis of Clifford circuits by simply following Pauli
terms around the circuit. We track the state of the system using Pauli terms that stabilize the
current state, and each applied operation transforms these stabilizers [Got98]. We define these
transformations via their stabilizer flows, which describe how Pauli terms before and after a gate
operation are related, as detailed in Appendix A. The simplicity of this approach underlies the
popularity of stabilizer codes for quantum error correction.
Consider the CSS surface code: It is typically defined and depicted as a checkerboard of interlocking weight-4 X and Z stabilizers. We can define a simple circuit using an ancillary measure
qubit and four layers of CNOT gates to measure a stabilizer, which we refer to as the standard
surface code circuit throughout and show in Figure 1. When this cycle circuit is considered as
a whole, we can see that it preserves the code stabilizers, leaving us at the end of the cycle in
the same checkerboard state we started in. In this picture, the code stabilizers are persistent and
unchanging.
However, during the execution of the cycle circuit, the code stabilizers are transformed by each
layer of operations, only returning to the state described by the initial checkerboard at the end
of the cycle. Further, the code stabilizers represent only around half of the stabilizers present at
any given time. At the start of the cycle, each measure qubit provides an additional single qubit

Accepted in Quantum 2023-07-12, click title to verify

3

Z

X
A

Z

A

End-cycle

B
X

B

Post-Reset

RZ

RX

Brickwork

Half-cycle

Brickwork

Pre-Meas.

End-Cycle

MZ

MX

Figure 1: Mid-cycle States in the Standard Surface Code Circuit. Left: The standard circuit for the surface
code, shown using CNOT gates on two measure qubits (X and Z) and two data qubits (A and B). Time proceeds
down the page. Diagram at the top indicates the order in which the data qubits are interacted with. Right: A
visual representation of the state at each point during the circuit. Each shape represents a single stabilizer term
consisting of either Z (blue) or X (red) Pauli elements. The corners of the shape indicate the qubits included in
the term, with circles indicating single qubit terms. Stabilizer terms introduced by the reset gates are marked
with an X.

Accepted in Quantum 2023-07-12, click title to verify

4

stabilizer enforced by the measurement or reset1 . Figure 1b shows how both the code stabilizers
and ancillary stabilizers evolve as the circuit is executed. For reasons we will explain later in
Section 2.2, we have made a motivated choice not to show the measure qubit stabilizers before the
reset layer and to include the measure qubit stabilizers into the code stabilizers after the layer of
reset operations; for now, this is simply a change of generators which doesn’t affect the described
state.
For convenience, we name these mid-cycle states as follows: Between the measurements and
resets, the end-cycle state is shown as the familiar checkerboard pattern. Immediately following the
reset gates, we see the flag-like pattern of the post-reset state. Here, we show a full generating set
of stabilizers, including the measure qubit stabilizers. This state is equivalent to the end-cycle state
when the single measure qubit stabilizers are included, as the weight-4 square code stabilizers and
the weight-5 flag-like terms differ only by those single qubit stabilizers. The full set of stabilizers
in both cases generate the same overall stabilizer group. This pattern is transformed by each
subsequent layer of CNOT gates, first into a brick-wall-like pattern we call the brickwork state,
then into a checkerboard pattern rotated by 45 degrees that we call the half-cycle state, then into a
modified version of the brickwork state, and finally back into a flag-like pattern at the pre-measure
state, returning us to the checkerboard pattern for the end-cycle state after measurements. The
half-cycle state is remarkable for being an unrotated surface code state, as originally proposed for
the surface code [Kit97; BK98]. The half-cycle state is a surface code state with the same distance
as the end-cycle state, but twice the number of qubits involved and twice the number of stabilizers
- the usually ignored measure qubits stabilizers have become included into the code state.
Recognising these mid-cycle states is helpful for three reasons. Firstly, they provide helpful
checkpoints for understanding circuits. The mid-cycle states break the problem into smaller pieces
which can be analysed and understood separately, rather than thinking of the entire cycle as a
single operation that preserves the code stabilizers. Secondly, it shifts the focus from the qubits
and their roles in the circuit toward the detecting regions. How errors are detected becomes more
clear, and the traditional assignment of specific roles to specific qubits becomes de-emphasised; all
qubits are equally covered by detecting regions. Finally, these states provides some insight into
what a surface code circuit should achieve, and inspiration on how it might be done differently.
For instance, the half-cycle state does not “remember where it came from” and can be mapped
back to an end-cycle state in more ways than the familiar one embodied in the standard circuit.
To explore these freedoms, and to better approach the necessity of fault-tolerance provided by
repeating the cycle circuit, we need to reach for a more general concept rooted in circuit approach.

2.2 Detectors and Detecting Regions
In fault-tolerant stabilizer circuits, errors are identified by noticing violations of ideal circuit behaviour. In particular, circuits often feature small sets of measurements that should display a
deterministic parity under noiseless execution. We refer to these sets of measurements as detectors.
In an experiment, recording a detector’s measurements with an overall parity different to the expected parity is clear evidence of an error occurring, which we call a detection event. This approach
is most natural for stabilizers codes achieving fault-tolerance via repeated measurement of the stabilizers, but also works for related stabilizer QEC strategies, including single-shot QEC [Fuj14;
Bom15], cluster-state based QEC [RHG06; Bom+21], subsystem codes [Bac05; Bra+12] and flagqubits [CR18; CC19; CR20].
For any given detector, we can ask where errors could be inserted into the circuit to affect that
detector; essentially the region of the circuit where the detector is sensitive to errors. We follow
Gottesman [Got22] in considering a circuit as made up of locations, essentially qubits between
operations. Each detector will be sensitive to specific errors in a finite set of locations in the circuit
only, which we call the detecting region.

Accepted in Quantum 2023-07-12, click title to verify

5

Legend

a) Trivial detecting regions

M

R

R

Z-type
location

H
H
Z-type
X-type
location location

M

R

Z Reset

H Hadamard

b) Simple detecting regions with CNOT

Z Measurement

R

M

R

M

R

M

M Included in detector

R

M

R

M

R

M

M Not Included

c) Simple detecting regions with CZ

R
R

H

H

M

R

M

R

H

H

d) Bit-ﬂip code circuit using CNOT

R

M

R

M

CNOT

M

R

M

R

CZ

M

H

M

H

e) Phase-ﬂip code circuit using CZ & H

R

H

H

H

H

H

H

M

R

H

H

H

H

H

H

M

Figure 2: Examples of detecting regions. a) Detecting regions for 1-qubit circuits. Here, the detectors are just
the single measurement in the circuit, which should have a deterministic outcome in the absence of noise. Z
Reset gates produce states that are stabilized by Z, indicated by a Z-type section of the detecting region (blue).
Z Measurements terminate Z-type sections of the detecting region. Hadamard gates change the type of the
detecting region as it moves through the circuit, producing X-type locations (red). b) Three copies of the same
simple circuit with a CNOT gate, indicating the three possible detectors and their detecting regions. Any two
of these detectors form a generating set for the full set of detectors. c) The same circuit and detectors compiled
into CZ and Hadamard gates. Note that CZ gates connect Z-type (blue) locations to X-type locations. d) A
part of a circuit for a bit-flip repetition code, using CNOT and Reset gates. The two consecutive measurements
shown form a detector. The associated detecting region is highlighted (blue), and is Z-type throughout. The
region covers neighbouring data qubits during the measurement, reflecting the bit-flip code’s ZZ code stabilizers.
e) A part of a phase-flip repetition code, using CZ and Reset gates. Similarly, the two consecutive measurements
shown form a detector. The associated detecting region is highlighted, containing locations of both Z-type and
X-type. The regions include the data qubits as X-type locations during measurement, reflecting the phase-flip
code’s XX code stabilizers.

Accepted in Quantum 2023-07-12, click title to verify

6

2.2.1

Examples of detecting regions

Figure 2 shows some simple detecting regions and associated detectors. A Z-basis measurement
included in a detector is sensitive to errors immediately before it that anti-commute with Z. We
can represent this by marking those locations in the circuit with Z-type. An isolated reset and
measurement in the same basis forms the smallest non-empty detector, where the detecting region
covers the one location in the circuit, as illustrated in Figure 2a. All operations relate parts of the
detecting region in the same way they relate Pauli terms being commuted through them, which
we refer to as their stabilizer flows. We define and discuss this concept in detail in Appendix A.
Operations with stabilizer flows that relate different Pauli types will also change the type of the
detecting region as it is propagated; for example, Hadamard gates with a Z-type on one side have
X-type on the other.
A detecting region then consists of a set of locations in the circuit, along with a Pauli type at
each location. A detection event will be caused by any inserted error that anti-commutes with the
type of the detecting region at its location. We say that the detecting region is sensitive to such
an error.
Detectors and detecting regions underlie the fault-tolerance of repetitively measuring code
stabilizers. Consecutive measurements of the same stabilizer will agree under noiseless execution,
and so pairs of consecutive measurements of the same code stabilizer form a detector in the bulk
of the circuit.
Detecting regions are easier to visualise in 1-dimensional classical codes such as repetition
codes. Figure 2d and Figure 2e show the detecting regions for bit- and phase-flip repetition codes
respectively, defined by neighbouring ZZ and XX code stabilizers respectively. The detecting
regions in the bulk of these codes consist of a small, closed and local part of the circuit, visually
indicating how much of the circuit each detector is responsible for.
We can transform easily between detectors and detecting regions. Given a detector, we can find
the detecting region by simply propagating Pauli types backward from the included measurements,
following stabilizer flows in reverse and backward-terminating on appropriate resets. This process
is deterministic (given that the measurement parities are deterministic), and will produce the
detecting region. Given a detecting region, the corresponding detector is simply the measurements
the region terminates on. We note that the task of choosing appropriate detectors and detecting
regions given an un-annotated circuit is a non-trivial task, and one that can have a large impact
on logical performance.
2.2.2

Overlapping structure of detecting regions

Given that each detecting region is responsible for some part of the circuit, it stands to reason that
a good set of detectors should have detecting regions that cover all relevant parts of the circuit.
These detecting regions should also overlap, such that any individual error is detected by multiple
regions and provides a usable syndrome.
In the repetition and surface codes, the bulk detecting regions cover locations in two neighbouring cycles, rather than one cycle as one might naively expect. They also cover the code stabilizer
at the time-slice between those cycles. Figure 3a illustrates this for the bit-flip repetition code,
where the time-slice between measure and reset gate layers shows the existing region covering the
ZZ stabilizer. During a single cycle, two detecting regions coexist; one emerging from that cycle’s
reset gate and expanding to cover the stabilizer, and one contracting from the code stabilizer to
terminate on that cycle’s measurement gate. Halfway through the cycle, we can see the regions
collectively produce the same pattern of stabilizers as the typical code state (ZZ on neighbouring
qubits), but involving all measure and data qubits, rather than only the data qubits. This is the
equivalent of the half-cycle state previously discussed for the surface code.
In the bulk of the repetition code, each location is covered by exactly two detecting regions,
meaning an inserted bit-flip error will be noticed by two detectors, as illustrated in Figure 3b.
This is typically represented in terms of the resulting error graph, shown in Figure 3c. Here, each
1 We have d2 data qubits and d2 − 1 measure qubits in a distance d patch. We have 1 logical observable, and
d2 − 1 code stabilizers touching the data qubits, and so obviously need another d2 − 1 stabilizers. We have one such
stabilizer on each measure qubit, as noted.

Accepted in Quantum 2023-07-12, click title to verify

7

Bit-ﬂip Repetition Code
a) Detecting regions during a cycle
Expanding

Contracting
Expanding

M

R

Z

Z

Contracting

M

R

M

R

Z

Z

Z

Z Z

Z Z

Z Z

Z

Z

Z

Z

Z

b) All detecting regions for a distance-5 code run for 4 cycles
R
R

M
M

R

M

R

M

R

M

R

M

R

M

R

M

R

M

R

M

R
R

R
R

M
M

R
R

M

M
M

R

M
M

c) Error graph under an independent bit-ﬂip error model

Figure 3: Overlapping detecting regions in the repetition code. All locations of all regions shown here are
Z-type. a) Two neighbouring detecting regions of the bit-flip repetition code (blue, purple), shown over three
cycles. Each detecting region covers two cycles: In the first cycle, it emerges from a reset on the measure qubit
and expands to cover the code stabilizer. In the second cycle, it contracts from the code stabilizer down to
terminate on a measurement. During the middle cycle, where the two shown regions co-exist, time-slices of the
detecting regions are shown. b) All detecting regions for a distance-5 bit-flip repetition code. The detection
regions overlap such that all locations in the circuit are covered by two detecting regions, except the boundaries
which are covered by one. Note the smaller detecting regions at the start of the code that emerge from resets
on both measure and data qubits. On cycles three and four, we omit the circuit elements to emphasise that
the detecting region shapes alone are sufficient to understand the implementation. Note the final detecting
regions terminate on measurements on both the measure and data qubits. c) The associated error graph
for the distance-5 bit-flip code, illustrating the correspondence between error graph edges and overlaps in the
detecting regions. Nodes on the boundary feature single-ended edges, corresponding to sections of the circuit
not overlapping with any other detecting region.

Accepted in Quantum 2023-07-12, click title to verify

8

detector is represented by a node. Edges between nodes indicate a possible bit-flip error that will be
noticed by these two detectors. Under an independent bit-flip error model, these edges correspond
directly to overlaps between the relevant detecting regions. The structure of these overlaps, and
the resulting structure of the error graph, makes the repetition and surface codes amenable to
decoding by matching [Den+02; Fow13b; Hig21].
Detecting regions are a useful primitive concept, as they single-handedly define relevant QEC
concepts, as follows:
• The measurements that the region terminates on defines the corresponding detector.
• The overlaps between regions define the edges of the error graph under an independent Pauli
error model, just as the detectors define the nodes of the error graph.
• The shapes of the regions define the circuit operations via the implied stabilizer flows.
As such, provided with only an overlapping structure of detecting regions, we have defined both
the code and the circuit in a natural way.
2.2.3

Detecting Region Slices

Time-slices of the detecting regions are also helpfully related to the code stabilizer picture. A
time-slice of a detecting region is a stabilizer of the state at that point in the circuit. Figure 4
shows four detecting region slices after subsequent layers of the standard surface code circuit.
a)

b)

c)
R

RX

R

RX

RX

R

RX

R

R

RX

R

RX

d)

Figure 4: Detecting region slices in a 2D circuit. Dots indicate qubits locations in a 2D grid. Each shape
corresponds to a slice of a detecting region including the qubits at each vertex. Colors indicate the Pauli
type, with X-type regions being red and Z-type regions being blue. a) Two detecting region slices representing
detectors as they are covering the code stabilizers of the surface code. b,c,d) Four detecting region slices in
each subsequent time-slice of the standard circuit, with intervening gate layers shown as an overlay. Two new
detecting regions introduced by the reset gates in (b) are shown, in addition to the two from (a).

In the language introduced by Aaronson and Gottesman [AG04] for simulating stabilizer circuits, a time-slice of a detecting region is a possible term in the stabilizer tableau, one that additionally corresponds to a specific detector. In the language introduced by Hastings and Haah
[HH21] for Floquet codes, a time-slice of a detecting region is a generating term of the instantaneous stabilizer group (ISG) that additionally corresponds to a specific detector. The mid-cycle
patterns discussed earlier were represented as time-slices of detecting regions, rather than as any
other choice of stabilizer generators. This makes them both more aesthetically pleasing and more
meaningful - again, each shape corresponds directly to a specific detector.
However, it is not the case that the time-slices of the detecting regions always form a complete
set of terms for the stabilizer tableau or ISG. Some circuit locations are not covered by any detecting
region, despite still being in the support of a stabilizer term. Examples include immediately after
measurement but before reset, as in Figure 4a, and on gauge qubits in subsystem codes. These
are locations where an inserted error cannot contribute to a logical error and does not need to be
detected, and so does not need to be included in any detecting region. This motivated our choice
to ignore the measure qubit stabilizers at the end-cycle state in Figure 1; they are not relevant to
error correction until after the reset gate, where they are again included in detecting regions.
The development of new code circuits, and especially understanding their behaviour at boundaries, can be greatly aided by constructing them in terms of detecting regions. This is especially
Accepted in Quantum 2023-07-12, click title to verify

9

true when considering how different detecting regions fit together to cover the space-time of the
circuit with an appropriate overlapping structure, as we will discuss in our main results.

2.3 Detecting Regions in the Surface Code
We now revisit a standard surface code circuit. To avoid retreading ground and to introduce some
new possibilities, we now consider the circuit as compiled for hardware using only Z-type reset
and measurements, CZ and Hadamard gates as shown in Figure 5. We now interpret the states
directly as time-slices of the detecting regions.
Compared to the standard circuit using CNOTs, this circuit displays regions with different Pauli
types at locations at the same time slice. The regions at each time-slice display a nice overlapping
structure by construction. Each location in the circuit is covered by four detecting regions, two
with Z-type and two with X-type. This produces the two connected components of the surface
code error graph under X and Z errors respectively. It also makes clear the correlated nature of Y
errors; wherever they are inserted, they anti-commute with four detecting regions rather than two.
We can also see that the mid-cycle states display more than just two kinds of detecting region
slices. We further distinguish detecting regions by whether they are expanding or contracting;
whether they emerged from a reset at the start of this round, or emerged in the previous round
and began this round covering the code stabilizers. These two regions evolve differently, with
the contracting regions getting smaller as the cycle circuit continues and the expanding regions
growing to cover the code stabilizers. In our constructions, tracking which regions are expanding
and contracting will prove important. Failing to contract a detecting region that has already
expanded will make a larger detecting region, one responsible for more of the circuit, overlapping
with more detecting regions and worsening logical performance.
The detecting regions picture allows us to emphasise that there are several equivalent ways
of looking at the surface code cycle. The familiar end-cycle picture involved starting with the
data qubits involved in a surface code state and the measure qubits un-entangled and ready to
be used. Starting at the half-cycle state, we have a picture where all qubits are involved in
a surface code state. During the cycle circuit, half of the stabilizers (those corresponding to the
contracting regions) are transformed to occupy only single measure qubits and are measured (while
the stabilizers corresponding to expanding regions transform to cover only data qubits), before we
return to the half-cycle state. Naively, a surface code without measure qubits where only half the
stabilizers are measured in each cycle sounds worse than a code with measure qubits where all
stabilizers are measured in each cycle; in fact these are two descriptions of the same circuit.
Alternatively, we can also start with the pair of brickwork states: The two-body stabilizers
can be measured via a common decomposition of a pair-measurement into a CNOT followed by
single-qubit measurement, with another CNOT allowing us to reconstruct a (slightly different)
brickwork pattern. Two layers of CNOTs allow us to move between the two brickwork patterns,
essentially exchanging which stabilizers are two- and six-body. Again, this is simply an unusual
description of the standard surface code circuit. The advantage of these alternative approaches to
the cycle circuit will become more clear as we use them to explain new constructions.

2.4 Boundaries
So far, we have focused on detecting regions in the bulk of the circuit, but now turn to explicitly
address what happens at boundaries, which can have a significant influence of the final circuit
performance. First, we address the general strategy we use for temporal boundaries in all surface
code circuits, and then provide some notes on the more complex spatial boundaries.
First, given a bulk circuit for the surface code, temporal boundaries (namely logical initialization
and measurement) can be introduced very simply. Due to the CSS nature of the standard surface
code circuit, we can implement logical measurement in the Z basis as follows: At any point in
the circuit (but traditionally at the end of the cycle where measurements are already occurring)
measure all the qubits in the Z basis. Delete any detecting region that anti-commutes with these
new measurements, and any detecting region that commutes with them now terminates on them;
these are the correct final round detectors to ensure the logical measurement is fault tolerant.
Logical measurement is the X basis is very similar, but the qubits should be measured in the X

Accepted in Quantum 2023-07-12, click title to verify

10

Z

X
A

Z

A

RZ

H

End-cycle

B
X

B

Post-Reset

RZ

H

H
Brickwork

H

H

Half-cycle

Brickwork

H

H
MZ

H

Pre-Meas.

H

H

End-Cycle

MZ

Figure 5: Mid-cycle States in the CZ Surface Code Circuit. Left: The circuit for the surface code compiled
for hardware using H and CZ gates, shown on two measure qubits (X and Z) and two data qubits (A and B).
Time proceeds down the page. Diagram at the top indicates the order in which the data qubits are interacted
with. Right: A visual representation of the state at each point during the circuit. Each shape represents a slice
of a detecting region. The corners of the shape indicate the qubits included in the term, with circles indicating
single qubit terms. Colors indicate the Pauli elements Z (blue) or X (red), either for the whole shape or for each
qubit in the slice. Expanding detecting regions are indicated by an X marker. Note the inclusion of unnecessary
Hadamard gates on qubit A at the start and end of each round; these make CSS stabilizers at measurement,
and canceling them yields XZZX/ZXXZ stabilizers at measurement.

Accepted in Quantum 2023-07-12, click title to verify

11

basis. Logical initialisation is essentially the same process but time-reversed, with resets taking
the place of measurements: At any point (but again traditionally at the start of the cycle where
resets are already occurring) reset all the qubits in the Z or X basis for Z or X logical initialization.
Again, delete or terminate the bulk detecting regions appropriately. We use this strategy for the
temporal boundaries of all our constructions. Even when the circuit is compiled to gates that mix
X and Z stabilizer terms, this strategy remains essentially the same. The circuit state is always
only single qubit rotations away from a CSS-like state2 .
Spatial boundaries can also be found using a similar strategy, but this is far from optimal.
In the original unrotated surface code [Kit97; BK98], drawing a square box containing (2d −
1)2 total qubits and simply removing all gates that cross this boundary is sufficient to make
the circuit for a distance-d patch from a tiled bulk circuit3 . However, unlike the temporal case,
these spatial boundaries are wasteful. The rotated surface code [BM07] significantly improves the
number of qubits used by exploiting a more complex boundary; appropriately including half the
measure qubits around a square patch for 2(d2 ) − 1 total qubits for a distance-d logical patch. This
exemplifies the major differences in performance that changes in boundaries can make to a surface
code construction.
For all of our constructions, finding efficient spatial boundaries presented a more interesting
and difficult challenge than finding the bulk circuit. For each construction, we present a choice of
boundaries that preserves the graph-like code distance [GNM22] (i.e. the code distance considering
only errors that produce pairs of detection events). This is not to say that other boundaries are
not possible, or even preferable. Various possible constraints or considerations, including from
hardware (for example, which qubits are measurable in parallel, such as all qubits or only nonnearest-neighbouring qubits) or from logical considerations (e.g. densely packing logical qubit
patches in a distillation factory) can place different demands on the circuit, which can be variously accommodated by different boundaries. Our strategy for finding boundaries involved simply
iterating on circuit details, especially which gates to omit or include at the boundaries, until the
detecting structure preserved the code distance and benchmarked well. As such, we consider developing spatial boundaries still more art than science, and we relied heavily on tools that sped up
iteration over any deep insights into how to pick good spatial boundaries.

2.5 Software Tools
A major challenge to exploring QEC circuits is the intricate and interlocking nature of the faulttolerant constructions. Getting a seemingly small detail wrong, from choosing the wrong measurements for a detector to choosing the wrong order for operations, tends to radically alter the logical
performance of the circuit. While simple error correction circuits can be designed by hand, the
constructions we present here necessitated the use of software tools to visualise and analyse the
circuits. Software tools also proved vital in verifying the correctness of the circuit (such as in terms
of code distance) and in benchmarking the true performance of the circuit.
In particular, we made extensive use of Stim [Gid21] and the tools it provides for representing
and manipulating QEC circuits, for verifying them and for benchmarking them. Over the course
of this work, Stim has been improved to include new tools for visualizing circuits and stabilizer
states during circuits, which we made extensive use of in both exploring and explaining these
constructions. Stim now also includes a prototype of an interactive circuit editor Crumble, which
is also accessible at algassert.com/crumble. This tool was especially useful for finding appropriate
boundary configurations for these code circuits, as it enabled rapid rearranging, inclusion and
omission of entangling gates at the boundaries, showing the resulting change in the detecting
structure. In Appendix F, we provide some convenient links for opening the circuits for our
constructions in Crumble, which we hope will serve as a convenient jumping off point.
These tools were crucial in several ways. First, the tools automated critical tasks like verifying
that a construction preserves the code distance, permitting cheap exploration because mistakes
2 The states reached by standard circuit for the surface code in CZs therefore violate the letter but not the spirit
of the CSS property of the surface code. This suggest we should more often consider the class of CSS-up-to-singlequbit-rotations codes
3 To draw out the equivalence to the temporal boundary strategy, this is equivalent to performing single qubit
measurements on all qubits outside the box between each layer of gates.

Accepted in Quantum 2023-07-12, click title to verify

12

would be caught early, and helping build intuition for what changes to the circuit constitute
mistakes. Second, the tools revealed new insights by making visualization and interaction easier.
Visualizing the interlocking nature of many detection regions was the initial impetus for all the
presented constructions. Crumble proved crucial both in finding effective circuits, especially in
finding appropriate boundary detecting regions, and in understanding and explaining our circuits
to each other. Finally, it proved important that our tools were flexible enough to handle these
constructions. Despite ostensibly being designed to simulate traditional QEC code circuits, Stim
operates on general annotated circuits and was able to analyse and benchmark our constructions
without any redesign. A tool built specifically for the current paradigm of measuring stabilizer
operators would be much less likely to achieve this without modification.
The importance of software tools used in this kind of work is often under appreciated, so we
have chosen to emphasise the tools we used here with the aim of encouraging wider use and further
development of such tools.

2.6 Hardware Requirements
The constraints under which we design error correction circuits come from difficulties and challenges we face in designing hardware. These constraints can depend sensitively on the hardware
architecture being targeted. We choose to focus our examples on the paradigm of superconducting
qubit arrays. As previously mentioned, the popularity of the surface code rests on the relatively
acceptable demands it makes on hardware: square lattice connectivity, and a cycle containing
only four layers of entangling CZ or CNOT gates. Further relaxing these hardware constraints
generally comes at a significant cost, typically in compromising the error correction performance
by introducing additional overhead in the cycle circuit.
Lower connectivities are generally easier to achieve in hardware, usually permitting higher couplings, lower crosstalk, fewer on-chip structures and control lines, and relaxing other constraints
such as the frequency arrangement of qubits. Connectivity in a square lattice presents an achievable
but difficult design modality [Goo+22; Kri+22], but cutting edge architectures featuring lower connectivity have also been produced [Sun+22]. However, lower connectivity has historically required
an unreasonable swap overhead to implement the surface code, usually frustrating performance
below threshold. Use of alternative codes better suited for lower connectivity generally feature
comprimises in the logical performance, such as the heavy-hex code displaying a threshold in only
one logical observable [Cha+20]. We present a circuit for the surface code that embeds on the
lower connectivity hex grid without swap overhead in Section 3.
Circuit decompositions are usually expressed in terms of CNOT and CZ gates. However,
other entangling operations are often naturally achievable in hardware, such as the ISWAP gate.
For example, in superconducting architectures with tunable couplers, the ISWAP gate is less
demanding in terms of frequency arrangement and may be performed at a higher fidelity than the
CZ gate [Fox+20]. However, an error correcting code must be compiled to ISWAP gates without
significant overhead before this can be taken advantage of. We present a circuit for the surface
code using ISWAP gates in Section 4.
Finally, QEC circuit design generally neglects important non-idealities of the hardware, such
as significant sources of correlated errors. In many architectures, including transmon qubit arrays,
the ability of the qubit to be promoted out of the computational states into a higher energy leakage
state presents such a source of correlated errors [Fow13a; Gho+13]. Such errors are not considered
at the level of designing the QEC circuit itself, with attempts to address leakage generally involving
adding minimal operations to the standard circuit attempting not to disturb the logical structure
while achieving some suppression of the correlated error effect [GF15; BB19; BVT21; McE+21;
Mia+22]. As such, these strategies add overhead to the standard circuit, producing a trade-off
between leakage error suppression and the errors induced by the included operations themselves.
We present a circuit that achieves such a benefit without any additional gate layers in Section 5.
In all three cases, the standard circuit places demands on the hardware that are considered
achievable, but the circuit decomposition itself proceeds without feedback from what is preferable
for the hardware. We regard this work as opening up new possibilities for tailoring the circuit
decomposition of a code to the strengths of hardware designs, with the hope that this frees up
further improvements in performance.

Accepted in Quantum 2023-07-12, click title to verify

13

3 Hex-grid Surface Code Circuits
Surface codes are typically compiled to circuits on a square grid (the grid with Schläfli symbol
{4,4}). In this layout, each qubit has four neighbors. Without using more layers of operations, it
seems difficult to use a sparser connectivity because every qubit interacts with all of its neighbors
in each cycle of the circuit. Measurement qubits interact with their four adjacent data qubits,
in order to acquire all the parts of the four-body code stabilizer. The data qubits interact with
their four adjacent measurement qubits, in order to make their contribution to the four stabilizers
involving that data qubit.
Here, we show a circuit for the surface code with the same code distance and the same number
of entangling layers as the usual circuit, but that executes on a hex grid (the grid with Schläfli
symbol {6,3}). When instantiated in a 2D architecture, this means that each qubit needs only
three couplers to neighbouring qubits, rather than the typical four.
We first address the circuit in the bulk, for which we provide two complementary explanations: a
bottom-up circuit-focused approach centered around the half-cycle state and a top-down stabilizerfocused approach centered around the brickwork states. We then talk about the challenge of
finding appropriate boundaries for surface code patches using this bulk circuit. Finally, we perform
numerical benchmarking of the presented circuit.

3.1 Bottom-up Circuit-Focused Construction
Following our previous discussion of the half-cycle state in Section 2.3, we can approach this circuit
as a new strategy for measuring half of the stabilizers of the half-cycle state without using any
additional qubits.
As in the standard surface code, a four body contracting stabilizer can be measured by using
two layers of CNOT gates; the first layer folds the stabilizer in half, from four body to two body;
the second folds it again into a one-body stabilizer, which can be directly measured. This half-cycle
circuit is pictured in Figure 6a. Distinct from the standard surface code, we then apply the same
gates in reverse order, returning to the half-cycle state by the same route we left it. This basic
action has required only three of the four nearest neighbour couplings on the square grid to be
used. The same action can be used on a neighbouring X stabilizer at the same time; the first layer
of CNOT gates folds the four-body X stabilizer in the opposite direction. The subsequent layer
also folds the X stabilizer into a single qubit stabilizer which can be measured.
These fold-based half-cycle circuits tile nicely. It’s possible to simultaneously measure entire
diagonal columns of square stabilizers, alternating between X type and Z type, as shown in Figure 6b. This lets us measure of half of the stabilizers in the half-cycle state, which is the goal of a
surface code cycle circuit.
Using this half-cycle and then its reverse differs from the standard circuit in two important
ways: First, as mentioned already, it only uses three of the four available couplings in each square
stabilizer to measure a column of stabilizers; and second, the cycle being reversed expands the
stabilizer back to where it was contracted from, essentially exchanging which detecting regions in
the half-cycle state are expanding and contracting. In the subsequent cycle, rather than executing
the same cycle circuit, we must use a different cycle circuit aiming to measure the stabilizers
corresponding to the contracting detecting regions, which are now in the columns adjacent to the
ones we just measured. We can use the same strategy we have just presented to measure those
columns as well; use two layers of CNOT gates to fold those stabilizers down to one-body stabilizers
to be measured, and then reverse those layers to return top the half-cycle state with expanding
and contracting regions exchanged. This is illustrated in Figure 6c.
Taking stock, we have constructed two cycle circuits starting and ending at the half-cycle state.
One measures the even numbered diagonal columns of alternating Z and X stabilizers, and the
other measures the odd numbered diagonal columns. If we alternate these two cycles, we measure
all the half-cycle stabilizers every two rounds. This means we return to the original half-cycle state
with the same pattern of expanding and contracting regions every two rounds. This distinguishes
the cycles here from the usual surface code circuit, which returns to the same half-cycle state in
every round, including the locations of the expanding and contracting regions.
These cycles must alternate: after one cycle, we return to a half-cycle pattern but with the

Accepted in Quantum 2023-07-12, click title to verify

14

expanding and contracting detecting regions switched. In the absence of noise, the state described
by these two patterns is identical; they have the same stabilizers. However, returning to the same
noise-free state obviously does not imply that we can simply repeat one of the two cycle circuits,
never learning half the stabilizers. In the presence of noise, these two states are not the same;
different stabilizers will have been measured more recently and so have less accumulated error. In
the detecting region picture, this is made even more obvious: at the half-cycle state, half of the
detecting regions are expanding and have so far existed for only around 1/4 of their overall lifetime,
whereas the contracting regions have already lived for around 3/4 of their lifetime. The change
in where the expanding and contracting regions are located at the half-cycle distinguishes the two
half-cycle patterns and enforces an overall 2-round-periodicity in the circuit.
The final important insight is that we can lay out the two cycle circuits in a compatible way,
having them agree on which nearest neighbouring coupling to avoid using. This is shown schematically in Figure 6d. Each of the two cycles only uses half of the couplings in the direction of the
second folding, with the other half being used in both cycle circuits. The resulting connectivity
actually used is therefore only a hex grid, rather than the usual square grid.

3.2 Top-down Stabilizer-Focused Construction
Considering the brickwork patterns of the surface code (as shown in Figure 7), we see a pattern of
two- and six-body stabilizers.
We can non-destructively measure a two body X stabilizer or a two body Z stabilizer via a
common circuit decomposition: performing a CNOT, then a single qubit X or Z basis measurement,
then undoing the CNOT. Since the two-body stabilizers in the brickwork states don’t overlap, we
can measure all these stabilizers in parallel. Both layers of CNOT gates operate along the two
body stabilizers, and so do not connect the two middle qubits in any six-body stabilizer.
To construct a complete cycle, we also need to transition between the two brickwork states.
As occurs in the standard surface code circuit, we can exchange the two- and six-body stabilizers
using two layers of CNOTs, as indicated in Figure 7. This switching is visually clear in the circuit
using CNOT gates, where we can see visually that the locations of the two body stabilizers in the
two brickwork patterns are the same, but their Pauli type has switched. Both layers of CNOT
gates operate perpendicular to the two body stabilizers, and again do not connect the two middle
qubits in any six-body stabilizer.
Putting this together, we can execute the surface code cycle on a hex grid. Starting in a
brickwork state, we:
1. Measure the two-body stabilizers using a CNOT layer, a measurement layer, and a CNOT
layer
2. Exchange the two-body and six-body stabilizer using two CNOT layers
3. Measure the two-body stabilizers, again using a CNOT layer, measurement layer, and a
CNOT layer
4. Exchange stabilizers again, returning to the original brickwork state, using two CNOT layers
This strategy uses two distinct cycles, and naturally embeds on a hex grid.

3.3 Boundaries
Having now addressed the bulk circuit, we turn to defining appropriate boundaries. We use the
strategy described in Section 2.4 for temporal boundaries. The spatial boundaries can be most
easily understood by looking at the half-cycle states. By comparison, the standard surface code
half-cycle state (Figure 1) features alternating weight-3 and weight-4 stabilizers around all four
boundaries.
Figure 8 shows slices of the full detecting regions for a logical qubit patch executing the threecoupler surface code circuit, illustrating the shape of detecting regions around the boundaries. The
boundary construction can be most easily understood at the half-cycle state, for instance Figure 8.4.

Accepted in Quantum 2023-07-12, click title to verify

15

Here, we see two flat boundaries on the top and left where detecting regions are truncated to weight3, and two spiky boundaries featuring weight-1 detecting regions on the right and bottom. This
contrasts with the standard surface code boundaries at the half-cycle shown in Figure 1, which has
all four boundaries featuring alternating flat and spiky detecting regions. This gives us complete
diagonal columns of detecting regions (also visualized in Figure 6) to measure out; specifically, the
alternating pattern on gates in each diagonal column terminate nicely with a weight-3 stabilizer at
one end (the flat boundary) but use a weight-1 region at the other end (the spiky boundary). Which
boundaries are spiky is therefore determined by the spatial direction for the gate layers adjacent
to measurement. The full circuit is provided in our data repository [MBG23]. The supplementary
figures include a visualization of the full cycle circuit including only 4 detecting regions in the bulk
(Supp. Fig. 5), which may aid the reader in tracking the evolution of one detecting region through
the circuit. For this purpose, we also recommend opening the circuit in Crumble using the links
provided in Appendix F.
We found appropriate boundary constructions using an iterative (or brute-force) approach.
Starting with the detecting region slices at the half-cycle state, we iteratively removed gates and
manipulated the detecting region termination points while attempting to preserve the graph-like
code distance [GNM22]. To restrict the search space, we constrained ourselves to exploring circuits
without changing the number of gate layers, without breaking the regular patterns of the gate
layers, and where possible preserving that measurement layers apply only to qubits on one of
the two neighboring sub-grids (often called data and measure qubits in the standard circuit). To
enable faster exploration of the impact of adding and removing gates on the detecting structure,
we recommend the use of interactive tools such as Crumble (as detailed in Section 2.5).

3.4 Benchmarking
Armed with the full description of the circuit, including boundaries, we now benchmark the circuit
by numerically simulating a quantum memory experiment. The full details of our benchmarking
strategy, including the noise model, are discussed in Appendix D. In particular, we benchmark
the circuit as compiled for superconducting hardware, using relative error rates representative of
current experimental errors [GNM22; Goo+22]. We compile to single qubit rotations, CZ gates
and Z-type measurements and resets only, with the primary error parameter p being equal to the
CZ gate error rate.
For brevity, we skip over intermediate benchmarking results and discuss only the teraquop
footprint. This is the number of physical qubits required to produce a logical qubit displaying a
one-in-a-trillion logical error rate over a d × d × d space-time block. This metric encapsulates the
most important information regarding the performance of the code: First, the vertical asymptote
where the footprint diverges vs. error rate indicates the threshold of the code, which is important
for estimating near term performance while hardware error rates remains near threshold. Second,
the relative value of the footprint at aspirational physical error rates (such as around p = 1 × 10−3 )
indicates the sub-threshold scaling of the code. Given the very low logical error rate involved,
the procedure for estimating the teraquop footprint involves linearly extrapolating the log logical
error to higher code distances. The procedure used is included in our code repository. Further
benchmarking plots for this code circuit are included in Appendix E, including the more traditional
plot of logical error rate versus physical error rate from which teraquop footprint is extrapolated.

3.5 Summary
The hex-grid surface code circuit presents an appealing alternative to the traditional surface code
circuit by reducing the connectivity required to implement the code at a minimal cost of final
logical performance. Lower connectivity in hardware generally reduces costs in implementing an
architecture, from relaxing frequency constraints to freeing up additional footprint on chip. Given
the minimal change to the threshold, we expect near-term superconducting hardware tailored
for the surface code can take advantage of the hex-grid circuit to improve physical error rates
over those achievable using a square grid. However, the use of a hex grid also brings additional
challenges; qubit and coupler yield is likely to be more costly in such an architecture, as we expect
compatible subsystem codes to reduce the effective code distance more than in the square grid

Accepted in Quantum 2023-07-12, click title to verify

16

surface code case. In a similar vein, using the hex grid circuit in a square grid architecture with
broken couplings provides additional freedom to avoid a reduction in code distance that imperfect
yield would typically entail.
The approach taken by this circuit makes clear that the surface code does embed naturally on
a hex grid, which opens the way to other similar constructions. In Appendix E, we additionally
show benchmarking results for compiling the surface code to a heavy-hex grid [Cha+20; Sun+22]
and semi-heavy-hex grid, both of which further relaxes the connectivity requirements relative to
a hex grid. The circuits themselves are included in the supplementary figures and in our data
repository. We also provide a compilation to an architecture providing heterogeneous entangling
operations: The hex-grid circuit naturally decomposes into two-qubit entangling measurements
along the connections for measuring two-body stabilizers and two-qubit entangling gates in the
orthogonal direction for exchanging brickwork states. Given progress in conducting hardware twoqubit parity measurements [LGB10; DS12; RPB18; Rea+22; Liv+22], this kinds of architecture
may also provide a compelling alternative to the traditional square grid.

Accepted in Quantum 2023-07-12, click title to verify

17

a) Folding four-body stabilizers

M

MX

b) Measuring half of the stabilizers in the half-cycle state

MX

M

MX

M

M

M

MX

M

MX

M

MX

M

MX

M

M
M

M

MX

M

MX

MX

MX

MX

MX

M

MX

M

MX

M

MX

M

MX

M

M

c) Measuring the other half of the stabilizers in the half-cycle state

M

MX

M

MX

M

MX

M

MX

M

M

MX

MX

MX

MX

MM
X

MMX

MM
X

MMX

MM

d) (b) and (c) superimposed

MMX

MM
X

MMX

MM
X

MM

MM
X

MMX

MM
X

MMX

MM

MMX

MM
X

MMX

MM
X

MM

MMXX

MMXX

MMXX

MMXX

Figure 6: Half-cycle Picture for the Hex-Grid Circuit. a) A schematic indication of how to measure neighbouring square four-body stabilizers of different types using gates on only three out of four edges. b) An
illustration of how folding can measure half of the stabilizers in the half-cycle state. These operations can be
reversed to reconstruct the half-cycle state, but with expanding and contracting regions exchanged. c) The
same strategy applied to the other half of the stabilizers in the half-cycle state. Again, these operations are
reversed to reconstruct the half cycle state. d) Visually superimposes the two cycles (b) and (c), illustrating on
the left that all stabilizers in a half-cycle state are measured by the two cycles, and that the resulting pattern
of gates requires only a hex grid to be implemented.

Accepted in Quantum 2023-07-12, click title to verify

18

M

M

Figure 7: Brickwork-state Picture for the Hex-grid Circuit. A schematic indicating how the hex-grid circuit
measures the appropriate stabilizers. Starting on the left, the two body stabilizers can be measured simply using
a common decomposition; applying a CNOT between the two qubits, measuring one of them, and applying the
same CNOT again, as indicated by the u-turn-like arrow. Changing between the two brickwork patterns can be
easily achieved by applying two layers of CNOTs along the direction perpendicular to the two body stabilizers,
as indicated by the straight arrows (center). X markers indicate six-body stabilizers that are contracted into
two-body stabilizers when moving to the right. These two-body stabilizers can then be measured, as indicated
by the u-turn-like arrow on the right.

1

5

9

2

4

3

MX

M

MX

M

M

RX

R

RX

R

R

M

MX

M

MX

M

R

RX

R

RX

R

MX

M

MX

M

M

RX

R

RX

R

R

M

MX

M

MX

M

R

RX

R

RX

R

MX

MX

MX

MX

RX

RX

RX

RX

6

10

8

7

11

M

MX

M

MX

M

R

RX

R

RX

R

MX

M

MX

M

M

RX

R

RX

R

R

M

MX

M

MX

M

R

RX

R

RX

R

MX

M

MX

M

M

RX

R

RX

R

R

MX

MX

MX

MX

RX

RX

RX

RX

12

Figure 8: The Mid-cycle States in the Hex-grid Circuit. All 12 layers of the hex-grid surface code circuit
over both distinct cycles. Pictured behind each layer of gates are the detecting regions slices immediately after
that layer. Detecting regions introduced in layer 2 are marked with an X. They are expanding from layer 2 until
layer 7, where they cover the usual surface code stabilizers, and are subsequently contracting.

Accepted in Quantum 2023-07-12, click title to verify

19

Figure 9: Teraquop footprint estimates for the hex-grid surface code circuit. The number of physical
qubits required for a single code patch to achieve a logical error rate of 1 × 10−12 over a d × d × d space-time
block. Each curve combines memory experiments in both Z and X basis, and uses the SI1000 noise model as
described in Appendix D. 4-CZ (blue circles) is the standard surface code circuit compiled to CZ gates, single
qubit rotations, and Z-type measurements and resets. 3-CZ (orange triangles) is the hex-grid circuit, using the
same gateset.

Accepted in Quantum 2023-07-12, click title to verify

20

4 ISWAP Surface Code Circuits
Surface code are traditionally constructed using CNOT-like gates. CNOT gates provide the theoretically simplest circuit implementation, corresponding most closely with the original introduction
of the surface code [Kit97; BK98], and usually referred to as the CSS surface code. These operations naturally assemble the stabilizer value to be measured onto the measure qubit, producing
circuit implementations that are easy to understand and manipulate.
Here, we show a circuit for the surface code using ISWAP gates. This circuit has the same
code distance and the same number of entangling layers as the usual circuit. This permits the
surface code to be operated without overhead on architectures that provide a native ISWAP-like
gate, rather than demanding a CNOT-like native interaction.
First, we address the background of the CNOT-like and ISWAP-like gate classes in more detail.
We then introduce the bulk circuit from the perspective of the half-cycle state, describe a choice
of patch boundaries that preserves the graph-like code distance, and numerically benchmark the
resulting code as a memory experiment.

4.1 Entangling Gates in Error Correction Circuits
Up to local single qubit Clifford gates, there are only four classes of Clifford two-qubit gates:
Identity-like, CNOT-like, SWAP-like, ISWAP-like. This equivalence is made clear by the KAK
decomposition of these gates, as discussed in detail in Appendix A.5. The Identity-like and SWAPlike gates are not entangling and cannot be used to construct a QEC circuit alone. CNOT-like
gates are the traditional gates used to construct QEC circuits. Using the remaining gate class, the
ISWAP-like gates, is addressed in this construction.
ISWAP-like gates can be understood as the product of a SWAP-like and a CNOT-like gate.
Gates with ISWAP-like behaviour move the quantum information around in addition to producing the necessary entanglement, making it non-obvious how to assemble the requisite stabilizer
information for measurement.
Different hardware implementations generally provide different native entangling gates, but
generally target a CNOT-like gate when aiming to perform error correction. In particular, superconducting qubit arrays traditionally target either a native CNOT such as via a cross-resonance
gate [Par06; RD10], or a native CZ via a fixed or tunable capacitive coupling [Yan+18; Fox+20].
As shown in Figure 5, the surface code can be trivially adapted to use CZ gates, producing
ZXXZ/XZZX stabilizers at measurement after canceling extraneous single qubit gates [Wen03;
Bon+21; Goo+22]. Such superconducting hardware can also naturally produce ISWAP-like gate [Aru+19],
but these have not been used in demonstrations of error correction due to a lack of appropriate
circuit decomposition. Here we present a circuit for the surface code using ISWAP gates.

4.2 Circuit Construction
For simplicity, we first consider the construction using the CXSWAP gate rather than ISWAP.
The CXSWAP gate is equal in action to a CX gate followed by a SWAP gate. It has the same
KAK decomposition coefficients as the ISWAP gate, but has the conceptual advantage that its
stabilizer flows each involve only Z or X terms and do not exchange them. Like circuits expressed
in CNOT gates, the resulting detecting regions have only one Pauli type throughout, simplifying
visualization. The circuit expressed in ISWAP gates differs only by single qubit gates, as described
in Appendix A.5.
The complexity in this circuit construction arises because of the swapping behaviour of the entangling interaction. In the standard picture, assembling the stabilizer information to be measured
is complicated by the movement of the relevant qubit states around the grid as the entangling layers are executed. By looking at detecting regions as a whole rather than focusing on moving qubit
states, we can identify patterns of detectors that tile nicely and reproduce the relevant properties
of the surface code.
Again, we start by considering the half-cycle state, as shown in Figure 10a. Rather than the
next layer of entangling gates constructing a standard brickwork state, the swapping behaviours
elongates the six body stabilizers. Figure 10b shows four of the detecting regions in this modified

Accepted in Quantum 2023-07-12, click title to verify

21

a)

b)

c)

d)

M
M

M

M

Figure 10: Half-cycle picture for the CXSWAP circuit. CXSWAP preserves detecting region type and is
equivalent to ISWAP up to single qubit gates. The layer of CXSWAP gates immediately before each detecting
region slice is shown. If the CXSWAP is decomposed into a CX followed by a SWAP, the black circle indicates
the control qubit of the CX. a) Four detecting regions in half cycle state are shown, two of X and Z type,
and two expanding (marked by an X) and two contracting (unmarked). b) The modified brickwork state using
CXSWAP as the entangling layer. c) The modified state immediately prior to measurement, having contracted
the two body stabilizers using CXSWAPs. d) The end-cycle state immediately after measurement, showing
dart-shaped four-body stabilizers.

brickwork state; showing all the detecting region slices is visually complicated because they now
overlap when drawn as detecting region slices. The next layer of entangling gates aims to contract
the two body stabilizers to one body for subsequent measurement, as shown in Figure 10c, and
produces an even more complex five-body stabilizer out of the previously extended six-body stabilizers. The subsequent measurement of the one-body stabilizer terms produces a relatively nice
pattern of dart shaped four-body stabilizers. While this looks quite different to the normal surface
code state at measurement, it displays the same overlapping structure of the stabilizers in the bulk,
illustrating that errors on the unmeasured qubits will produce the same pattern of detection events
as the standard code. We can then reverse these circuit steps (exchanging measurements for reset
gates) to return to the half-cycle state. This cycle has the effect of contracting half of the detecting
regions in that state and replacing them with new regions that expanded from the reset gates. The
other half of the detecting regions expanded to cover the dart-shaped four-body stabilizers after
measurement, and then returned to the half-cycle state. Similar to the hex-grid circuit, we use
an analogous cycle to then measure those detecting regions, with the newly expanded detecting
regions now expanding to cover the dart-shaped stabilizers at measurement. By alternating these
two cycles, we implement the surface code.

Figure 11: Patch distortion in the CXSWAP/ISWAP circuit. Center: The end-cycle state for the standard
surface code circuit. Left, Right: The end-cycle states for the CXSWAP/ISWAP circuit, showing data qubits
shifted in alternating directions along diagonal lines in the bulk. Corresponding measure qubits are shifted in
the opposite direction to data qubits. Boundaries feature more complex distortions. The CXSWAP/ISWAP
circuit alternates between two cycles, reaching both end-cycle states shown.

The pattern of stabilizers in the ISWAP circuit can also be understood as a distortion of the
standard surface code patch. Figure 11 shows this distortion visually; each diagonal line of data
qubits is shifted in alternating directions. Along the same lines, measure qubits are distorted in

Accepted in Quantum 2023-07-12, click title to verify

22

the opposite direction, as they are exchanged with data qubits by the action of the ISWAP gates.

4.3 Boundaries
As with other constructions, the boundaries prove more complex than the bulk circuit. At the
measurement layer, they correspond to the standard rotated surface code boundaries modified by
the same distortion applied to stabilizers shown in Figure 11. The full circuit schedule for the
CXSWAP circuit is shown in Figure 12. While all of the overlapping detecting regions in the
bulk are visually complex, focusing on the detecting regions around the outer edges of the patch
help to understand the boundaries. In particular, the mid-cycle states display helpful symmetry
and a simple boundary shape consisting of terminating weight-1 detecting regions. Our process
for finding the boundary construction was similar to that of the hex-grid circuit; starting with a
guess at good detecting slices at the mid-cycle, we iteratively removed gates and manipulated the
detecting region terminations while preserving the graph-like code distance, eventually arriving at
the provided construct.
Slightly different boundaries are used in the ISWAP circuit we benchmarked, as included in the
supplementary figures; two additional qubits were left in at the corners and measurements gates
were not preferentially arranged to occur on the same qubit sub-grid (i.e. not on any neighbouring
qubits simultaneously). Given both the CXSWAP and ISWAP circuits benchmark with essentially
the same performance as their standard circuit counterpart, we believe the differences in boundaries
does not significantly impact performance. That said, the boundary shown for the CXSWAP circuit
is slightly simpler to understand visually and would likely perform better where hardware imposes
costs on simultaneously measuring neighbouring qubits.
1

5

R
RX

R

RX

R

RX

RX

RX

R

RX

R

RX

R

RX

R

RX

RX

RX

R

RX

R

R

R

R

R

3

2

R

RX

RX

6
MX

MX

7

M

M

M

M

M

MX

M

MX

MX

MX

M

MX

M

MX

M

MX

M

MX

MX

MX

M

MX

M

MX

M

9

4

RX

RX

M

10

R

R

R

R

RX

R

RX

RX

RX

R

RX

R

RX

R

RX

R

RX

RX

RX

R

RX

R

RX

R

11

8

R

R

12

M

M

MX

M

MX

M

MX

MX

MX

M

MX

M

MX

M

MX

M

MX

MX

MX

M

MX

M

M

M

M

M

MX

MX

Figure 12: Both cycles for the CXSWAP circuit. Detecting region slices are shown after each layer of gates
in the cycle. Regions introduced by the resets in panel 1 are marked with a black X. Detecting regions overlap
in the bulk, as shown more simply in Figure 10, but tile nicely at the mid-cycle (3 and 9) and end-cycle (6 and
12) states. Red regions are X stabilizers, blue regions are Z stabilizers.

Accepted in Quantum 2023-07-12, click title to verify

23

4.4 Benchmarking
We now numerically benchmark the circuit by simulating a quantum memory experiment using
both the standard and ISWAP circuits. The full details of our benchmarking strategy, including
the noise model, are discussed in Appendix D. In particular, we set the primary error component
p in both cases to be the CZ or ISWAP gate for the standard and ISWAP circuits respectively.
We find that the teraquop footprint for the ISWAP circuit is essentially identical to the standard
circuit. As before, such a qualitative statement is sensitive to the details of the error model.
However, we expect that this circuit will be of interest for experimental implementations under
the assumption that the ISWAP gate may provide a path to lower error rates than a CNOT or CZ
gate, or provide other benefits not reflected in our simple error model.

4.5 Summary
The ISWAP circuit presents a compelling alternative circuit to target for hardware architecture
with a natural ISWAP gate, alleviating the need to target a CNOT-like entangling gate for implementing the surface code. This construction completes the possible implementations of the surface
code in terms of the 2Q CLifford KAK gate classes.

Accepted in Quantum 2023-07-12, click title to verify

24

Figure 13: Teraquop footprints for the ISWAP surface code circuit. The number of physical qubits required
for a single code patch to achieve a logical error rate of 1 × 10−12 over a d × d × d space-time block. Each
curve combines memory experiments in both Z and X basis, and uses the SI1000 noise model as described
in Appendix D. 4-CZ (blue circles) is the standard surface code circuit compiled to CZ gates, single qubit
rotations, and Z-type measurements and resets. 4-ISWAP (orange triangles) is the ISWAP circuit, using ISWAP
gates, single qubit rotations, and Z-type measurements and resets.

Accepted in Quantum 2023-07-12, click title to verify

25

5 Walking Surface Code Circuits
Surface code circuits typically aim to provide a method of measuring static stabilizers, leaving any
logical time dynamics to a higher level of code manipulation. Compiling logical algorithms in the
surface code, such as by lattice surgery [Hor+12], typically manipulates the underlying circuit only
subtractively, that is by deciding which stabilizers to simply not measure. In this view, the roles of
the physical qubits in the circuit are fixed, and the only variable is whether the operations dictated
by the template circuit are performed or not at any given location in space and time. With the
freedom provided by additional detecting region shapes, it is possible to break the fixed allocation
of qubit roles to physical qubits, and thereby break the fixed location of code stabilizers on the
underlying qubit grid.
Here, we present various circuits for walking a surface code patch, moving it on the underlying
qubit grid without increasing overhead in circuit layers or reducing the code distance. This has the
effect of exchanging the roles of data and measure qubits, which is a desirable primitive operation
in a code circuit for the purposes of mitigating leakage [Fow13a; GF15; BB19].
First, we discuss the relevance of qubit roles to the problem of correlated errors induced by
leakage. We then introduce the walking circuit and its detecting structure, describe the moving
patch boundaries, and numerically benchmark the code circuit. Finally, we discuss the implications
for leakage mitigation in hardware experiments.

5.1 Leakage Mitigation in QEC Experiments
Most hardware implementations for quantum computing feature higher energy states nearby the
chosen computational subspace, which can be erroneously populated in what is generally referred
to as a leakage error. Leakage errors are especially problematic for quantum error correction, as
the states they produce are typically long lived and not accounted for in the physical interactions
used to implement gates [Fow13a]. Leakage errors generally induce a large number of equivalent
uncorrelated Pauli errors, providing an out-sized contribution for the error budget in a quantum
error correction experiment [Goo+22].
Various strategies are typically used to reduce the prevalence of leakage errors in gate implementations [Mot+09; Che+16; Fox+20], and in removing or suppressing the correlated effect of
leakage errors when they do occur in the typical cycle circuit. Leakage is generally easier to remove from measure qubits, as immediately after measurement they are not holding any important
quantum information and can be unconditionally reset [Mag+18; BVT21; McE+21; Zho+21].
Removing leakage from data qubits presents a more difficult challenge. Data qubit leakage can
be removed directly by the use of gate operations that specifically affect the leakage state without
disturbing the computational states [Mia+22], but such additional operations introduce new error
sources to the error budget.
Alternatively, the roles of measure and data qubits can be regularly exchanged by the addition
of SWAP or CNOT-like operations [Fow13a; GF15; BB19]. Assuming that entangling interactions
do not move leakage between qubits, this permits leakage removal on each physical qubit after it
is measured in every second cycle, curtailing the possible spread of leakage in time. However, this
strategy also introduces additional operations necessary to exchange the qubit roles, impacting
the final error budget. The circuit discussed here provides the ability to exchange qubit roles
without adding any additional gates. While this strategy does not resolve leakage errors entirely, it
provides a compelling alternative to known strategies for exchanging roles and could compliment
direct removal strategies by alleviating some of the burden of leakage errors.

5.2 Circuit Construction
Figure 14 shows the standard circuit alongside the stepping circuit that exchanges measure and
data qubits. The initial insight for constructing this circuit can be found in the half cycle state,
illustrated in Figure 14c. In the standard surfaces code circuit, pairs of detecting regions begin
centered around the same measure qubit, one expanding one covering just the measure qubit and
one contracting one covering four data qubits and the measure qubit, as illustrated previously in

Accepted in Quantum 2023-07-12, click title to verify

26

a) Standard Surface Code
Z

RZ

MZ

RX

MX

A
X
B

b) Stepping Surface Code
RZ

Z

MZ

A

RX

X

MX

B

e)

c)

d)

f)

Figure 14: Comparing the circuit and mid-cycle states for standard and stepping circuits. a) The standard
circuit for the surface code on two measure qubits (Z, X) and two data qubits (A,B). The measure qubits are
reset, assemble stabilizer information from their four neighbouring measure qubits in the order indicated by the
Z-shaped arrows, and are measured. b) The stepping circuit, which is identical to the standard circuit until
the last layer of CNOT gates. This layer is instead the same as the first layer of CNOT gates with target and
control reversed. At the measurement layer, the roles of qubits have been exchanged, with qubits that began the
round as data qubits (A,B) now being measured. c) The half-cycle state for both circuits, showing six detecting
regions. Two expanding regions are marked with an X. The expanding regions have a choice of whether to pair
up with the upper-left or lower-right contracting regions of the same Pauli type. d) The second brickwork state
for both circuits. The choice of pairing for the expanding region is now aligned along the diagonal axis. e) The
flag-like state immediately before measurement for the standard circuit, corresponding to pairing the expanding
region with the upper-left contracting region. f) The flag-like state for the stepping circuit, corresponding to
pairing the expanding region with the lower-right contracting region.

Accepted in Quantum 2023-07-12, click title to verify

27

Figure 4. By the half-cycle, these have both been mapped to four-body stabilizers involving their
shared measure qubit.
The half-cycle state is highly symmetric, and this makes clear that maintaining this pairing
and measuring out the contracting region on that measure qubit is only one possible option.
Figure 14c shows a second possible pairing of expanding and contracting regions. Choosing to
pair expanding and contracting regions around a different qubit choice has the effect that the
contracting regions terminate on what was previously a data qubit, and the expanding regions
cover stabilizers involving what were previously measure qubits. This exchanges the underlying
qubit roles on the physical grid while preserving the logical structure of the code.
In fact, this different pairing requires only a very simple modification; changing the directions
of the CNOT gates in the last layer, which we refer to as the stepping trick. That this trick is
sufficient can be seen from the symmetry of the weight-2 detecting region slices immediately before
the last layer of entangling gates. The direction of the last layer of CNOTs determines which of
the two qubits the detecting region will contract down to. This trick is relatively generic, and can
be easily applied to other circuits. In this section, we focus on applying the stepping trick to the
standard circuit and emphasise the resulting ability to move a logical patch in arbitrary directions
on the underlying grid. The same trick can be easily applied to the hex circuit to exchange qubit
roles, as we discuss further in Section 6. The trick also applies to repetition codes, as we illustrate
in Appendix B.

5.3 Boundaries
The boundaries prove more complex to construct than the bulk circuit. The walking circuit
boundary must be chosen carefully to appropriately create new detecting regions on the leading
edges, the two spatial boundaries in the direction of movement. We must also have detecting
regions appropriately measured out on the trailing edges, the two spatial boundaries facing away
from the direction of movement. In Figure 15, we provide a choice of boundaries that preserves
the graph-like code distance, prioritizing not introducing any problematic hook errors.
One important detail we do not address visually here is the behaviour of the logical observable.
As the code patch moves, the logical observable can be moved along with it by the inclusion of
measurements at the trailing boundary, as expressed in the benchmarked circuits included in our
data and code repository [MBG23].
We refer to the behaviour exhibited by one application of this circuit as taking a step and a
single cycle as a step cycle to distinguish it from the standard cycle where the logical patch remains
in place. The step cycle circuit can be trivially shifted in space to follow the patch, allowing further
steps to be taken, and rotated in space to permit steps to be taken in the four cardinal directions
relative to the physical qubit square grid.
Interestingly, compared to the standard circuit, the walking cycle circuit and its time inverse are
more distinct. In the standard circuit, running the circuit in reverse is equivalent to a 180-degree
spatial rotation of the same circuit; in terms of only the represented stabilizers, the two flag-like
patterns are identical and the two brickwork patterns are equivalent up to rotation. This is not the
case in the walking cycle, where all the patterns are noticeably different. The time-reversed cycle
circuit, with measurements and resets exchanged, provides another pattern of boundaries which
results in the patch taking a step (in the opposite direction to the time-forward circuit), and can
similarly be shifted and rotated to permit steps to be taken in any direction. We only use the
forward-going cycle shown in Figure 15 in the benchmarked circuits.

5.4 Behaviours for the Logical Patch
Given the capability of taking a step in any direction in each cycle, we can define additional behaviours for the logical qubit patch which can be helpful. Figure 16 shows four possible macroscopic
behaviours which can be achieved using step cycle circuits, which we benchmark in the following
section. The most basic behaviour, wiggling, involves simply taking steps back and forth on the
spot, returning to the same position every second cycle. This presents a minimal overhead in
terms of number of qubits to achieve the swapping of qubit roles in the bulk. Continuing to take
additional steps in the same direction continues to move the patch through the underlying qubit

Accepted in Quantum 2023-07-12, click title to verify

28

X

Z

B

A
Z

A

RZ

X

B

RX

MZ

MX

Figure 15: Mid-Cycle States in the Walking Circuit. Left: The circuit for the walking surface code, shown
on two measure qubits (X and Z) and two data qubits (A and B). Time proceeds down the page. Right: The
detecting region slices at each layer of the circuit. Each shape represents a single stabilizer term consisting of
either Z (blue) or X (red) Pauli elements. The corners of the shape indicate the qubits included in the term,
with circles indicating single qubit terms. The expanding detecting regions introduced in this cycle are marked
with an X.

Accepted in Quantum 2023-07-12, click title to verify

29

Possible behaviours for a surface code patch using the step cycle circuit
Stepping

Wiggling

Gliding

Sliding

Figure 16: Behaviours for the logical patch using step cycle circuits. Given the capability of taking a single
step (Stepping), we can chain adjacent cycles of steps to produce additional behaviours. These include the patch
stepping back and forth in place, returning to its starting position every second cycle (Wiggling), continuing
to step in the same direction (Gliding) or taking alternating perpendicular steps to move the patch laterally
(Sliding).

grid, which we call gliding. Another specific behaviour more compatible with current layouts for
logical algorithms is sliding, where the patch takes alternating steps in perpendicular directions,
allowing patches to move laterally. This could be especially convenient when considering routing
problems, especially when all other qubits are engaging in wiggling behaviour. An application of
this behaviour to aiding logical compilation is discussed in Appendix C.

5.5 Benchmarking
We now numerically benchmark the circuit by simulating a quantum memory experiment using
stepping circuits in each of the three behaviours presented in Figure 16. As before, the full details
of our benchmarking strategy, including the noise model, are discussed in Appendix D.
The teraquop footprints for all four behaviours are qualitatively very similar, with footprints
between 1000 and 3000 qubits at an aspirational limiting error rate of 1 × 10−3 . The standard
surface code displays slightly better performance than the walking codes, which we attribute to the
additional qubits that the step cycle moves into as it steps, resulting in a larger number of qubits
used for the same distance and error suppression. We also notice that the wiggling behaviour
displays slightly better performance than the gliding and sliding behaviours, which we attribute
to changes in the number of long error chains in the gliding and sliding behaviours through time.
Overall though, the relative performance of these codes is subject to our assumed error model, and
we would expect an error model that included leakage to affect the relative performance of these
codes substantially.

5.6 Summary
In summary, we have presented a circuit that achieves the exchange of roles of measure and data
qubits without additional gate overhead. Additionally, this circuit moves the logical patch on

Accepted in Quantum 2023-07-12, click title to verify

30

Figure 17: Teraquop footprints for the walking surface code circuits.
The number of physical qubits
required for a single code patch to achieve a logical error rate of 1 × 10−12 over a d × d × d space-time block.
Each curve combines memory experiments in both Z and X basis, and uses the SI1000 noise model as described
in Appendix D. 4-CZ (blue circles) is the standard surface code circuit compiled to CZ gates, single qubit
rotations, and Z-type measurements and resets. WIGGLING-CZ (orange triangles), GLIDING-CZ (green stars),
and SLIDING-CZ (red squares) are walking circuits for wiggling, gliding and sliding behaviours respectively.

Accepted in Quantum 2023-07-12, click title to verify

31

the underlying physical qubit grid, opening new possible behaviours for the logical patch. In the
absence of leakage errors, the circuit performs comparably to the traditional surface code circuit.
We expect when considering leakage errors that this circuit will display additional advantages,
given the exchange of roles coupled with existing progress on removing leakage from measure qubits.
Simulating this circuit in the presence of leakage and quantifying the advantage is important future
work. We expect that this technique will compliment current work on direct removal of leakage
on data qubits, rather than solve the presence of leakage outright. The low additional overhead
to implement this technique in terms of error rates makes it a compelling addition to practical
error correction experiments. In addition to the relevance of walking to leakage removal, it also
has implications for higher-level logical compilation, which we discuss in Appendix C.

6 Conclusion and Outlook
The three circuit constructions we have presented in detail represent three applications of this
approach to QEC circuit construction. In this section, we address combining these connectivity,
gate and behaviour benefits, address some additional related constructions, and provide some
outlook for these techniques to be applied more broadly.

6.1 Further Constructions
The presented circuits provide distinct benefits from the view of simplifying the required hardware,
but these are not mutually exclusive. We can combine the constructions above to generate circuits
for each combination of benefits, including a circuit that embeds on a hex grid, uses ISWAP
gates, and exchanges data and measure qubits between neighbouring cycles. While we do not
address these combined circuits in the same level of detail, we do provide the exact circuit and
benchmarking results.
Table 1 presents each of the constructions that we have benchmarked. We have included summary benchmarking for each circuit in Appendix E, and detailed benchmarking as supplementary
figures available as an ancillary file and in our data repository [MBG23].
In addition to the circuits that we presented in detail and their combinations, we include some
additional related circuits which we briefly discuss here. We present these additional circuits in the
toric case without boundary constructions, but hope that finding appropriate boundaries will not
prove especially difficult in light of the examples and methods discussed for the main constructions.
While we explicitly addressed embedding on a hex grid, cutting edge hardware architectures
have targeted the related heavy-hex grid, where an additional qubit is placed on each edge of the
hex grid, reducing the average connectivity below three. Using similar techniques to the hex grid
circuits, we built a circuit for the surface code on the heavy-hex grid. This circuit uses six layers
of entangling gates per measurement cycle. (The number of layers of entangling gates can be
reduced from six to four by repurposing flag qubits for teleportation, but we assumed this would
make performance worse and so did not benchmark that variant of the circuit for this paper.) Our
heavy-hex circuit outperforms the heavy-hex code [Cha+20; Sun+22], and also the heavy-square
code [Cha+20].
We also include a circuit for the semi-heavy-hex grid, where additional qubits are included on
only a third of the hex-grid edges, which we use as measure qubits. This grid represents a middle
ground between hex and heavy-hex grids, where the average connectivity is still lower than three,
and qubits requiring measurement during the cycle have lower connectivity than the remaining
qubits. This circuit requires only three layers of entangling gates per measurement cycle, taking
advantage of the additional qubits to increase parallelization when compared to the hex-grid circuit.
Finally, we present additional circuits considering more unusual underlying qubit hardware,
specifically hybrid circuits using a hardware native parity measurement on a third of the edges
in a hex grid. This represents a middle ground between an architecture targeting the hex-grid
circuit and one targeting only pair measurements [HH21; Gid22]. Each qubit in the hybrid circuit
must participate in only one pair measurement and two standard entangling gates rather than
three pair measurements, possibly simplifying the implementation of the architecture in hardware.
Hardware implementing pair measurements has continued to improve [LGB10; DS12; RPB18;

Accepted in Quantum 2023-07-12, click title to verify

32

Circuit Type
Standard
Hex-grid (Section 3)

ISWAP (Section 4)

Walking (Section 5)
Wiggling
Gliding
Sliding
Toric
CSS Toric Code
Heavy-hex
Semi-heavy-hex
Parity Assisted

Circuit Label

Grid

Entangling Gate

Qubits
Exchange
Roles
No
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
No
Yes
Yes

Square
CX
Square
CZ
Hex
CX
Hex
CZ
Hex
CX
Hex
CZ
Square
CXSWAP
Square
ISWAP
Hex
CXSWAP
Hex
ISWAP
Hex
CXSWAP
Hex
ISWAP
Capable of arbitrary movement direction
WIGGLING-CX
Square
CX
Yes
WIGGLING-CZ
Square
CZ
Yes
GLIDING-CX
Square
CX
Yes
GLIDING-CZ
Square
CZ
Yes
SLIDING-CX
Square
CX
Yes
SLIDING-CZ
Square
CZ
Yes
Presented without boundary constructions
TORIC-4-CX
Square
CX
No
TORIC-3_HEAVY-CX
Heavy-hex
CX
No
TORIC-3_SEMI_HEAVY-CX Semi-heavy-hex CX
No
1/3 of edges do parity measurements instead of unitary interactions
TORIC-3-CX_MXX_MZZ
Modified Hex
CX, MXX, MZZ
N/A
3-CX_MXX_MZZ
Modified Hex
CX, MXX, MZZ
N/A
3-CZ_MZZ
Modified Hex
CZ, MZZ
N/A
4-CX
4-CZ
3-CX
3-CZ
3-CX-wiggle
3-CZ-wiggle
4-CXSWAP
4-ISWAP
3-CXSWAP
3-ISWAP
3-CXSWAP-wiggle
3-ISWAP-wiggle

Table 1: All circuit constructions. An exhaustive list of circuit constructions included in this work. Benchmarking for all circuits is included in Appendix E.

Rea+22; Liv+22], and this circuit provides an opportunity to use such hardware for the surface
code. Under our assumed error model, which gives the same two-qubit depolarizing strength to
two qubits gates and pair measurements, these circuits display better performance than equivalent
circuits using only two qubit gates. However, we expect details of the true error model in hardware
to determine their relative performance in practice. We include them as inspiration for alternative
hardware architectures to target the surface code without additional overhead.

6.2 Open Problems
These constructions collectively represent only the first steps toward tailoring QEC circuit decompositions to relax or improve hardware requirements. Here, we discuss some directions for future
research we hope are encouraged by the results presented here.
First, the surface code is only one error correction code. We chose to focus on it for its relevance
to current experimental implementations of error correction. Applying these ideas to other codes
is important open work, particularly to the color code, dynamical codes such as the honeycomb
code, and to codes designed with biased noise in mind.
Second, the spatial compatibility of these code circuits with each other and with other standard
circuits warrants further exploration. In particular, finding circuits for implementing sub-system
codes that are compatible with these code circuits will be necessary for future implementation of
these circuits on large grids of imperfect qubits.
Third, further refining the simple boundaries we have presented may be necessary to optimize
performance and obey additional hardware constraints. In the context of logical algorithms, some
boundary constructions may pack better than others, and behaviours like sliding may be useful in

Accepted in Quantum 2023-07-12, click title to verify

33

reducing costs. Other boundary constructions may be useful to respect constraints on which qubits
may be measured simultaneously, even with an additional overhead in qubit number or packing
ability.
Finally, the benchmarking we presented here is deficient in that it fails to account for the
primary ways we expect our circuit constructions to do better than the standard circuit. Benchmarking them with more realistic noise models, especially those including hardware accurate gate
errors, leakage, crosstalk and other effects of relaxing requirements on the underlying device architecture is an important next step for qualifying the advantages made possible by these circuits.

6.3 Outlook
In this work, we have introduced an approach to constructing quantum error correction circuits
more directly than via considering static stabilizer codes and only then forming their circuit decomposition. This work complements a wider thrust toward considering the full space-time dynamics
of quantum error correction circuits [Got22].
We emphasise the concept of detecting regions as a helpful basis for considering stabilizers at all
points during QEC circuits. We used the insights produced by slicing detecting regions to generate
new circuits for implementing QEC codes. These provide new freedoms to hardware engineers
designing devices to implement QEC in experiments. We hope that these initial constructions
serve as certificates that this approach is worth pursuing further.
6.3.1

A note on recent progress in the space-time approach

Following this work first appearing online, two additional works were published presenting progress
in the space-time approach to fault-tolerance. We would like to draw attention to these works
specifically, as we feel they compliments the concepts discussed in this work, and hope to encourage
future developments along these lines.
First, [Bom+23] presents a lower-level approach to topological stabilizer fault tolerance, demonstrating that fault-tolerance in circuit-based, measurement-based, fusion-based and Floquet-based
quantum computing can be understood as implementations of the same underlying fault-tolerant
structure. In contrast to our work, where we restricted ourselves to the language of circuits, this
work uses the language of the ZX calculus. In particular, the Pauli web of a check in a ZX-graph
is the direct analogue of a detecting region in a circuit. We chose to focus on the circuit picture for
its applicability to hardware implementation, in particular being able to directly benchmark the
circuit performance under hardware noise models. For those free of such considerations, we highly
recommend the language of the ZX calculus and this work.
Second, [DP23] presents a generalised scheme for correcting faults in Clifford circuits by constructing an appropriate spacetime code over that circuit. In contrast to our work, where we
consider only optimising the surface code circuit, this work considers the more general problem in
arbitrary Clifford circuits and of decoding the resulting code. As the authors note, the stabilizer
terms of the spacetime code correspond to detectors in our work. We appreciate and endorse the
authors suggestion that their approach could push the circuit-centric approach further, especially
in searching for promising new quantum codes and circuit constructions.
We feel these works serve as further evidence that considering the spacetime structure of circuits
is a powerful new paradigm for approaching fault-tolerance. Moving beyond stabilizer codes reveals
new connections between different fault-tolerance strategies, opens new avenues for exploration,
and gives us hope for future improvements in the best strategies for implementing useful quantum
computation in practice.

Contributions
Matt McEwen and Craig Gidney conceived of using the detecting region picture to produce new
circuits for the surface code. Craig Gidney developed software tools, including Stim, that were vital
in exploring and developing these concepts and constructions. Matt McEwen conceived and built
the initial wiggling and walking surface code circuits. Dave Bacon and Craig Gidney conceived
and built the initial ISWAP surface code circuits. Craig Gidney conceived and built the initial
Accepted in Quantum 2023-07-12, click title to verify

34

hex-grid surface code circuits. All authors participated in synthesizing these ideas into a coherent
narrative centered around overlapping structures of detecting regions. Matt McEwen compiled the
manuscript.

Acknowledgements
We thank Michael Newman and Cody Jones for valuable discussions around these concepts as they
were being developed. We thank Austin Fowler for writing the internal software tool we used for
syndrome decoding, and for helpful review of the manuscript. We thank Alexis Morvan and Oscar
Higgot for helpful review of the manuscript. We thank Alex Townsend-Teague for pointing out an
error in the walking circuit figures. Finally, we would like to thank the entire Google Quantum AI
team for making an environment where this work is possible.

Availability of data and code
The circuits that were benchmarked and the resulting raw samples are available on Zenodo at
https://zenodo.org/record/7587578 [MBG23]. The supplementary figures, along with the latex
source and assets for this manuscript, are also available in the data repository and with the ArXiv
submission. Code used to produce the circuits and to run the benchmarking is available on GitHub
at https://github.com/Strilanc/midout. Stim, including new tools for visualizing circuits and
stabilizers, is available on GitHub at https://github.com/quantumlib/Stim [Gid21].

References
[Aar22]

Scott Aaronson. “Introduction to Quantum Information Science II Lecture Notes”. In:
(2022).

[AG04]

Scott Aaronson and Daniel Gottesman. “Improved simulation of stabilizer circuits”.
In: Physical Review A 70.5 (Nov. 30, 2004), p. 052328. issn: 1050-2947, 1094-1622.
doi: 10.1103/PhysRevA.70.052328.

[Aru+19]

Frank Arute et al. “Quantum supremacy using a programmable superconducting processor”. In: Nature 574.7779 (Oct. 24, 2019). Publisher: Nature Publishing Group,
pp. 505–510. issn: 0028-0836, 1476-4687. doi: 10.1038/s41586-019-1666-5.

[AWH22]

David Aasen, Zhenghan Wang, and Matthew B. Hastings. “Adiabatic paths of Hamiltonians, symmetries of topological order, and automorphism codes”. In: (2022). Publisher: arXiv Version Number: 2. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2203.11137.

[Bac05]

Dave Bacon. “Operator Quantum Error Correcting Subsystems for Self-Correcting
Quantum Memories”. In: (2005). Publisher: arXiv Version Number: 4. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.QUANTPH/0506023.

[BB19]

Natalie C. Brown and Kenneth R. Brown. “Leakage mitigation for quantum error
correction using a mixed qubit scheme”. In: Physical Review A 100.3 (Sept. 18, 2019).
Publisher: American Physical Society, p. 032325. issn: 2469-9926, 2469-9934. doi:
10.1103/PhysRevA.100.032325.

[BE20]

Nikolas P. Breuckmann and Jens N. Eberhardt. “Balanced Product Quantum Codes”.
In: (2020). Publisher: arXiv Version Number: 3. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2012.09271.

[BE21]

Nikolas P. Breuckmann and Jens Niklas Eberhardt. “Quantum Low-Density ParityCheck Codes”. In: PRX Quantum 2.4 (Oct. 11, 2021), p. 040101. issn: 2691-3399. doi:
10.1103/PRXQuantum.2.040101.

[BK05]

Sergey Bravyi and Alexei Kitaev. “Universal quantum computation with ideal Clifford
gates and noisy ancillas”. In: Physical Review A 71.2 (Feb. 22, 2005), p. 022316. issn:
1050-2947, 1094-1622. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevA.71.022316.

[BK22]

Nouédyn Baspin and Anirudh Krishna. “Connectivity constrains quantum codes”. In:
Quantum 6 (May 13, 2022), p. 711. issn: 2521-327X. doi: 10.22331/q-2022-05-13-711.

Accepted in Quantum 2023-07-12, click title to verify

35

[BK98]

S. B. Bravyi and A. Yu. Kitaev. “Quantum codes on a lattice with boundary”. In:
(1998). Publisher: arXiv Version Number: 1. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.QUANT-PH/9811052.

[BM07]

H. Bombin and M. A. Martin-Delgado. “Optimal resources for topological two-dimensional
stabilizer codes: Comparative study”. In: Physical Review A 76.1 (July 6, 2007),
p. 012305. issn: 1050-2947, 1094-1622. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevA.76.012305.

[Bom+21]

Hector Bombin et al. “Logical blocks for fault-tolerant topological quantum computation”. In: (2021). Publisher: arXiv Version Number: 1. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2112.12160.

[Bom+23]

Hector Bombin, Daniel Litinski, Naomi Nickerson, Fernando Pastawski, and Sam
Roberts. “Unifying flavors of fault tolerance with the ZX calculus”. In: (2023). Publisher: arXiv Version Number: 1. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2303.08829.

[Bom15]

Héctor Bombín. “Single-Shot Fault-Tolerant Quantum Error Correction”. In: Physical Review X 5.3 (Sept. 28, 2015), p. 031043. issn: 2160-3308. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevX.5.031043.

[Bon+21]

J. Pablo Bonilla Ataides, David K. Tuckett, Stephen D. Bartlett, Steven T. Flammia,
and Benjamin J. Brown. “The XZZX surface code”. In: Nature Communications 12.1
(Dec. 2021), p. 2172. issn: 2041-1723. doi: 10.1038/s41467-021-22274-1.

[Bra+12]

Sergey Bravyi, Guillaume Duclos-Cianci, David Poulin, and Martin Suchara. “Subsystem surface codes with three-qubit check operators”. In: (2012). Publisher: arXiv
Version Number: 2. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.1207.1443.

[BVT21]

F. Battistel, B.M. Varbanov, and B.M. Terhal. “Hardware-Efficient Leakage-Reduction
Scheme for Quantum Error Correction with Superconducting Transmon Qubits”. In:
PRX Quantum 2.3 (July 26, 2021), p. 030314. issn: 2691-3399. doi: 10.1103/PRXQuantum.2.030314.

[CC19]

Christopher Chamberland and Andrew W. Cross. “Fault-tolerant magic state preparation with flag qubits”. In: Quantum 3 (May 20, 2019), p. 143. issn: 2521-327X. doi:
10.22331/q-2019-05-20-143.

[Cha+20]

Christopher Chamberland, Guanyu Zhu, Theodore J. Yoder, Jared B. Hertzberg, and
Andrew W. Cross. “Topological and Subsystem Codes on Low-Degree Graphs with
Flag Qubits”. In: Physical Review X 10.1 (Jan. 31, 2020), p. 011022. issn: 2160-3308.
doi: 10.1103/PhysRevX.10.011022.

[Che+16]

Zijun Chen et al. “Measuring and Suppressing Quantum State Leakage in a Superconducting Qubit”. In: Physical Review Letters 116.2 (Jan. 13, 2016). Publisher:
American Physical Society, p. 020501. issn: 0031-9007, 1079-7114. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.116.020501.

[Cór+13]

A. D. Córcoles et al. “Process verification of two-qubit quantum gates by randomized
benchmarking”. In: Physical Review A 87.3 (Mar. 19, 2013), p. 030301. issn: 1050-2947,
1094-1622. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevA.87.030301.

[CR18]

Rui Chao and Ben W. Reichardt. “Quantum Error Correction with Only Two Extra
Qubits”. In: Physical Review Letters 121.5 (Aug. 1, 2018), p. 050502. issn: 0031-9007,
1079-7114. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.121.050502.

[CR20]

Rui Chao and Ben W. Reichardt. “Flag Fault-Tolerant Error Correction for any Stabilizer Code”. In: PRX Quantum 1.1 (Sept. 3, 2020), p. 010302. issn: 2691-3399. doi:
10.1103/PRXQuantum.1.010302.

[CS96]

A. R. Calderbank and Peter W. Shor. “Good quantum error-correcting codes exist”.
In: Physical Review A 54.2 (Aug. 1, 1996), pp. 1098–1105. issn: 1050-2947, 1094-1622.
doi: 10.1103/PhysRevA.54.1098.

[Den+02]

Eric Dennis, Alexei Kitaev, Andrew Landahl, and John Preskill. “Topological quantum
memory”. In: Journal of Mathematical Physics 43.9 (Sept. 2002), pp. 4452–4505. issn:
0022-2488, 1089-7658. doi: 10.1063/1.1499754.

[DP23]

Nicolas Delfosse and Adam Paetznick. “Spacetime codes of Clifford circuits”. In:
(2023). Publisher: arXiv Version Number: 1. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2304.05943.

Accepted in Quantum 2023-07-12, click title to verify

36

[DS12]

David P. DiVincenzo and Firat Solgun. “Multi-qubit parity measurement in circuit
quantum electrodynamics”. In: (2012). Publisher: arXiv Version Number: 2. doi:
10.48550/ARXIV.1205.1910.

[Fow+12]

Austin G. Fowler, Matteo Mariantoni, John M. Martinis, and Andrew N. Cleland.
“Surface codes: Towards practical large-scale quantum computation”. In: Physical Review A 86.3 (Sept. 18, 2012). Publisher: American Physical Society, p. 032324. issn:
1050-2947, 1094-1622. doi: 10.1103/physreva.86.032324.

[Fow13a]

Austin G. Fowler. “Coping with qubit leakage in topological codes”. In: Physical Review A 88.4 (Oct. 8, 2013). Publisher: American Physical Society, p. 042308. issn:
1050-2947, 1094-1622. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevA.88.042308.

[Fow13b]

Austin G. Fowler. “Optimal complexity correction of correlated errors in the surface
code”. In: (2013). Publisher: arXiv Version Number: 1. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.1310.0863.

[Fox+20]

B. Foxen et al. “Demonstrating a Continuous Set of Two-qubit Gates for Near-term
Quantum Algorithms”. In: Physical Review Letters 125.12 (Sept. 15, 2020). _eprint:
2001.08343, p. 120504. issn: 0031-9007, 1079-7114. doi: https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.125.120504.

[Fuj14]

Yuichiro Fujiwara. “Ability of stabilizer quantum error correction to protect itself
from its own imperfection”. In: Physical Review A 90.6 (Dec. 1, 2014), p. 062304. issn:
1050-2947, 1094-1622. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevA.90.062304.

[GE21]

Craig Gidney and Martin Ekerå. “How to factor 2048 bit RSA integers in 8 hours
using 20 million noisy qubits”. In: Quantum 5 (Apr. 15, 2021). Publisher: Verein zur
Förderung des Open Access Publizierens in den Quantenwissenschaften, p. 433. issn:
2521-327X. doi: 10.22331/q-2021-04-15-433.

[GF15]

Joydip Ghosh and Austin G. Fowler. “Leakage-resilient approach to fault-tolerant
quantum computing with superconducting elements”. In: Physical Review A 91.2
(Feb. 20, 2015), p. 020302. issn: 1050-2947, 1094-1622. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevA.91.020302.

[Gho+13]

Joydip Ghosh, Austin G. Fowler, John M. Martinis, and Michael R. Geller. “Understanding the effects of leakage in superconducting quantum-error-detection circuits”.
In: Physical Review A 88.6 (Dec. 23, 2013), p. 062329. issn: 1050-2947, 1094-1622.
doi: 10.1103/PhysRevA.88.062329.

[Gid21]

Craig Gidney. “Stim: a fast stabilizer circuit simulator”. In: Quantum 5 (July 6, 2021),
p. 497. issn: 2521-327X. doi: 10.22331/q-2021-07-06-497.

[Gid22]

Craig Gidney. A Pair Measurement Surface Code on Pentagons. 2022. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2206.12780.

[GNM22]

Craig Gidney, Michael Newman, and Matt McEwen. “Benchmarking the Planar Honeycomb Code”. In: Quantum 6 (Sept. 21, 2022), p. 813. issn: 2521-327X. doi: 10.22331/q2022-09-21-813.

[Goo+21]

Google Quantum AI et al. “Exponential suppression of bit or phase errors with cyclic
error correction”. In: Nature 595.7867 (July 15, 2021). _eprint: 2102.06132, pp. 383–
387. issn: 0028-0836, 1476-4687. doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-021-03588-y.

[Goo+22]

Google Quantum AI et al. “Suppressing quantum errors by scaling a surface code
logical qubit”. In: (2022). doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2207.06431.

[Got22]

Daniel Gottesman. “Opportunities and Challenges in Fault-Tolerant Quantum Computation”. In: (2022). Publisher: arXiv Version Number: 1. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2210.15844.

[Got97]

Daniel Gottesman. “Stabilizer Codes and Quantum Error Correction”. Publisher:
arXiv Version Number: 1. PhD thesis. 1997.

[Got98]

Daniel Gottesman. “The Heisenberg Representation of Quantum Computers”. In:
(1998). Publisher: arXiv Version Number: 1. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.QUANT-PH/9807006.

[HH21]

Matthew B. Hastings and Jeongwan Haah. “Dynamically Generated Logical Qubits”.
In: Quantum 5 (Oct. 2021). Publisher: Verein zur Forderung des Open Access Publizierens in den Quantenwissenschaften, p. 564. doi: 10.22331/q-2021-10-19-564.

[HH22]

Jeongwan Haah and Matthew B. Hastings. “Boundaries for the Honeycomb Code”. In:
Quantum 6 (Apr. 21, 2022), p. 693. issn: 2521-327X. doi: 10.22331/q-2022-04-21-693.

Accepted in Quantum 2023-07-12, click title to verify

37

[Hig21]

Oscar Higgott. “PyMatching: A Python package for decoding quantum codes with
minimum-weight perfect matching”. In: (2021). Publisher: arXiv Version Number: 2.
doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2105.13082.

[Hor+12]

Clare Horsman, Austin G Fowler, Simon Devitt, and Rodney Van Meter. “Surface code
quantum computing by lattice surgery”. In: New Journal of Physics 14.12 (Dec. 7,
2012), p. 123011. issn: 1367-2630. doi: 10.1088/1367-2630/14/12/123011.

[KG00]

Navin Khaneja and Steffen Glaser. “Cartan Decomposition of SU(2^n), Constructive
Controllability of Spin systems and Universal Quantum Computing”. In: (2000). Publisher: arXiv Version Number: 1. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.QUANT-PH/0010100.

[Kit97]

A. Yu Kitaev. “Fault-tolerant quantum computation by anyons”. In: Annals of Physics
303.1 (1997), pp. 2–30. issn: 00034916. doi: 10.1016/S0003-4916(02)00018-0. arXiv:
quant-ph/9707021.

[Kri+22]

Sebastian Krinner et al. “Realizing repeated quantum error correction in a distancethree surface code”. In: Nature 605.7911 (May 26, 2022). Publisher: Springer Science
and Business Media LLC, pp. 669–674. issn: 0028-0836, 1476-4687. doi: 10.1038/s41586022-04566-8.

[LGB10]

Kevin Lalumière, J. M. Gambetta, and Alexandre Blais. “Tunable joint measurements
in the dispersive regime of cavity QED”. In: Physical Review A 81.4 (Apr. 1, 2010),
p. 040301. issn: 1050-2947, 1094-1622. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevA.81.040301.

[Liv+22]

William P. Livingston et al. “Experimental demonstration of continuous quantum error
correction”. In: Nature Communications 13.1 (Dec. 2022), p. 2307. issn: 2041-1723.
doi: 10.1038/s41467-022-29906-0.

[Mag+18]

P. Magnard et al. “Fast and Unconditional All-Microwave Reset of a Superconducting
Qubit”. In: Physical Review Letters 121.6 (Aug. 7, 2018). Publisher: American Physical
Society, p. 060502. issn: 0031-9007, 1079-7114. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.121.060502.

[MBG23]

Matt McEwen, Dave Bacon, and Craig Gidney. “Data for “Relaxing Hardware Requirements for Surface Code Circuits using Time-dynamics””. In: (Jan. 31, 2023).
doi: 10.5281/zenodo.7587578.

[McE+21]

Matt McEwen et al. “Removing leakage-induced correlated errors in superconducting
quantum error correction”. In: Nature Communications 12.1 (Dec. 2021), p. 1761. issn:
2041-1723. doi: 10.1038/s41467-021-21982-y.

[Mia+22]

Kevin C. Miao et al. “Overcoming leakage in scalable quantum error correction”. In:
(2022). Publisher: arXiv Version Number: 1. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2211.04728.

[Mot+09]

F. Motzoi, J. M. Gambetta, P. Rebentrost, and F. K. Wilhelm. “Simple Pulses for Elimination of Leakage in Weakly Nonlinear Qubits”. In: Physical Review Letters 103.11
(Sept. 8, 2009). Publisher: American Physical Society, p. 110501. issn: 0031-9007,
1079-7114. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.103.110501.

[MS99]

Klaus Mølmer and Anders Sørensen. “Multiparticle Entanglement of Hot Trapped
Ions”. In: Physical Review Letters 82.9 (Mar. 1, 1999), pp. 1835–1838. issn: 0031-9007,
1079-7114. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.82.1835.

[Pae+22]

Adam Paetznick et al. “Performance of planar Floquet codes with Majorana-based
qubits”. In: (2022). Publisher: arXiv Version Number: 2. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2202.11829.

[Par06]

G. S. Paraoanu. “Microwave-induced coupling of superconducting qubits”. In: Physical Review B 74.14 (Oct. 31, 2006), p. 140504. issn: 1098-0121, 1550-235X. doi:
10.1103/PhysRevB.74.140504.

[PK21]

Pavel Panteleev and Gleb Kalachev. “Asymptotically Good Quantum and Locally
Testable Classical LDPC Codes”. In: (2021). Publisher: arXiv Version Number: 2.
doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2111.03654.

[RD10]

Chad Rigetti and Michel Devoret. “Fully microwave-tunable universal gates in superconducting qubits with linear couplings and fixed transition frequencies”. In: Physical Review B 81.13 (Apr. 5, 2010), p. 134507. issn: 1098-0121, 1550-235X. doi:
10.1103/PhysRevB.81.134507.

Accepted in Quantum 2023-07-12, click title to verify

38

[Rea+22]

Matthew J. Reagor, Thomas C. Bohdanowicz, David Rodriguez Perez, Eyob A. Sete,
and William J. Zeng. “Hardware optimized parity check gates for superconducting surface codes”. In: (2022). Publisher: arXiv Version Number: 1. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2211.06382.

[RHG06]

R. Raussendorf, J. Harrington, and K. Goyal. “A fault-tolerant one-way quantum
computer”. In: Annals of Physics 321.9 (Sept. 2006), pp. 2242–2270. issn: 00034916.
doi: 10.1016/j.aop.2006.01.012.

[Rof+22]

Joschka Roffe, Lawrence Z. Cohen, Armanda O. Quintavalle, Daryus Chandra, and
Earl T. Campbell. “Bias-tailored quantum LDPC codes”. In: (2022). Publisher: arXiv
Version Number: 2. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2202.01702.

[RPB18]

Baptiste Royer, Shruti Puri, and Alexandre Blais. “Qubit parity measurement by parametric driving in circuit QED”. In: Science Advances 4.11 (Nov. 2, 2018), eaau1695.
issn: 2375-2548. doi: 10.1126/sciadv.aau1695.

[Sho95]

Peter W. Shor. “Scheme for reducing decoherence in quantum computer memory”. In:
Physical Review A 52.4 (Oct. 1, 1995), R2493–R2496. issn: 1050-2947, 1094-1622. doi:
10.1103/PhysRevA.52.R2493.

[Ste96]

Andrew Steane. “Multiple-particle interference and quantum error correction”. In:
Proceedings of the Royal Society of London. Series A: Mathematical, Physical and
Engineering Sciences 452.1954 (Nov. 8, 1996), pp. 2551–2577. issn: 1364-5021, 14712946. doi: 10.1098/rspa.1996.0136.

[Sun+22]

Neereja Sundaresan et al. “Matching and maximum likelihood decoding of a multiround subsystem quantum error correction experiment”. In: (2022). doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2203.07205.

[Tuc+19]

David K. Tuckett et al. “Tailoring Surface Codes for Highly Biased Noise”. In: Physical Review X 9.4 (Nov. 12, 2019), p. 041031. issn: 2160-3308. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevX.9.041031.

[Tuc05]

Robert R. Tucci. “An Introduction to Cartan’s KAK Decomposition for QC Programmers”. In: (2005). Publisher: arXiv Version Number: 1. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.QUANTPH/0507171.

[Wen03]

Xiao-Gang Wen. “Quantum Orders in an Exact Soluble Model”. In: Physical Review
Letters 90.1 (Jan. 10, 2003), p. 016803. issn: 0031-9007, 1079-7114. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.90.016803.

[Yan+18]

Fei Yan et al. “Tunable Coupling Scheme for Implementing High-Fidelity Two-Qubit
Gates”. In: Physical Review Applied 10.5 (Nov. 28, 2018). Publisher: American Physical
Society, p. 054062. issn: 2331-7019. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevApplied.10.054062.

[Zho+21]

Yu Zhou et al. “Rapid and unconditional parametric reset protocol for tunable superconducting qubits”. In: Nature Communications 12.1 (Dec. 2021). Publisher: Springer
Science and Business Media LLC, p. 5924. issn: 2041-1723. doi: 10.1038/s41467-02126205-y.

A Stabilizer Formalism and Detecting Regions
The stabilizer formalism provides helpful tools for analysing Clifford circuits, like the ones used
in error correction [Got97]. We generically use ‘stabilizer’ to mean a signed Pauli term used to
describe a quantum state; a state is stabilized by a Pauli term if applying that term as an operation
does not affect the state, or equivalently the state is an eigenstate of the given Pauli operator with
an eigenvalue ±1 matching the sign of the stabilizer.
In the main text we have described the notion of detectors and detecting regions. Recall
that detectors are the set of measurement outcomes that display deterministic behavior under
noiseless execution. The choice of detectors is not unique, since products of detectors themselves
are also valid detectors. Given a choice of measurements with deterministic outcomes for noiseless
execution, it is useful to define a formalism which allows for identifying detecting regions.

Accepted in Quantum 2023-07-12, click title to verify

39

A.1 Stabilizer Flows
Operations in stabilizer circuits, including preparation and measurement in a Pauli basis, parity
measurements, and Clifford preparations, can be understood entirely by the way they transform
stabilizers [Got98; AG04; Gid21]. Here, we introduce notation and definitions we use implicitly to
describe these transformations in terms of ‘stabilizer flows’. Flows are a generalization of the notion
of a stabilizer, which can also be applied to dissipative operations such as resets and measurements.
Let Pn denote the set of Pauli operators on n qubits: all operators that are a tensor product of
{I, X, Y, Z} along with a phase ±1. Let gs be an operation applied to a system s. Let mixs be an
operation that allocates a system S and prepares it into the maximally mixed state. Let initq be
an operation that allocates a new qubit q and prepares it into the state |0⟩. Let controlq (x) be the
operation x controlled by qubit q. Let expectationq (x) be the expected probability of measuring
|1⟩, if q was measured in the computational basis after the operation x.
g
g
We define a stabilizer flow A −
→ B in terms of cancelling phase kickback. The expression A −
→B
is an assertion that phase kickback from A before g would be exactly cancelled by phase kickback
from B −1 after g. Formally:
Definition A.1. Stabilizer flow arrow notation:


g
[A −
→ B] ≡ expectationq (Hq · controlq (Bs−1 ) · gs · controlq (As ) · Hq · mixs · initq ) = 0
This definition is shown as a circuit in Figure A.1a. Of note are the following properties of
stabilizer flows:
• The definition avoids using g −1 , or controlling g with q, so that the definition can be used
on irreversible operations such as measurement.
• The definition can be executed on a quantum computer, by running the prescribed series
of operations to estimate the probability of measuring |1⟩. When A and B are members of
the Pauli group and g is a stabilizer operation, such an experiment can efficiently determine
whether a given stabilizer flow is correct because all expectations are either 0%, 50%, or
100%.
g

• For a gate g and a Pauli A, there may not exist any Pauli B such that A −
→ B. An example of
this is when g is Z-basis measurement and A is the X Pauli. The measurement anticommutes
with X, destroying any information that could be used after the measurement to cancel the
phase kickback from X before the measurement. This type of missing stabilizer flow also
arises in situations involving elided interactions with the classical world, such as dissipative
reset operations.
g

g

• For a gate g and a Pauli A, there may be multiple stabilizer flows, A −
→ B and also A −
→ C.
An example of this is when g is the gate that prepares the system into the |0⟩ state from no
previously existing qubit. In this case no previously existing qubit is a 1 dimensional Hilbert
R
R
space, and we denote identity on this as 1. Then 1 −
→ Z as well as 1 −
→ I. This follows
because after preparing |0⟩, measuring Z results in the +1 eigenstate of Z, while measuring
I always results in a +1 eigenstate. This type of gate is at the origin of different choices one
can make for detector regions.
• For a gate g which results in a measurement record, the Pauli phase may depend on the
measurement result. For example measuring Z with result r of 0 or 1 results in the flow
g
I−
→ (−1)r Z
In Table A.1 we present a list of stabilizer flows for a large set of Clifford gates, measurements,
g
and preparations. Note that for unitary gates, the stabilizer flow A −
→ B can be directly calculated
using B = gAg −1 . The table presents only a set of generators. This is because stabilizers flows
form a group (for a proof of this see in Section A.3). In particular this means that if one has two
g
g
g
stabilizer flows A −
→ B and C −
→ D, then the stabilizer flow AC −
→ DB is a valid stabilizer flow.
Lemma A.2. Scalar factors can be moved across the flow by conjugation:
g

g

∀c ∈ C : (cA −
→ B) = (A −
→ Bc∗ )
Accepted in Quantum 2023-07-12, click title to verify

40

g
g
g
b) Product (A→B) · (C→D) = AC→DB

g
a) Deﬁnition of A→B

s

Mix

q R

A

g

s

-1

B

H

H

M

0

g
g
c) Phases iA→B= A→-iB

s

Mix

q R

g

A

Mix

q R

X

H

H

M

q R

H

-1

B

H

M

0

q' R

H

H

M

0

H

M

0

H

M

0

H

M

0

Mix

A

g

-1

B
-1

S

H

s Mix
M

0

q R

Z

M

Z

H

R
h) Example 1→I

R
g) Example 1→Z

R

-1

D

H

q R

0

Z

H

1

g

M
f) Example Z→Z

H

s

C

q R

s

-1

B

H
e) Example X→Z

s

A

g
g
d) Phases A→iB = -iA→B

S

H

Mix

Z

s

H

M

0

q R

1

H

R

I

Figure A.1: Definition of stabilizer flow arrow notation, and examples We use the following non-standard
gate indicators: Mix prepares the maximally mixed state. R here indicates the initialization of a new qubit,
rather than the reset of an existing qubit which preserves the dimension of the Hilbert space. In all cases, the
g
measurement outcomes are required to be always 0. a) The definition of A −
→ B in terms of a circuit. Here
we show the case where A and B are single qubit Pauli operators, but similar circuits apply when A and B are
(possibly differing) multi-qubit Pauli operators. b) An illustration of the circuit defining the product of stabilizer
flows, illuminating the reversed order of elements after the flow. c,d) Illustration of including a phase in the
H

stabilizer flow circuit definition. e) An example of the circuit confirming a simple stabilizer flow X −→ Z. f) An
M

example of a circuit confirming a stabilizer flow Z −→ Z for a non-reversible operation, measurement in the Z
basis (M ). g,h) Examples where the dimension of the spaces of the Pauli operators on the left hand and right
R

R

hand side of a stabilizer flow arrow are different, for 1 −
→ Z and 1 −
→ I. In this case 1 is the operator which
acts on the a 1 dimensional space representing there being no qubit.

Proof. A scalar factor on A is equivalent to a Z rotation on the ancilla qubit q during the
controlled application of A. This rotation commutes with g, so it can be slid to the other side of
the circuit and fused into the controlled application of B −1 , without changing the function of the
circuit. The scalar ends up conjugated because B is inverted in the circuit.
Definition A.3. Stabilizer flow product:
g

g

g

(A −
→ B) · (C −
→ D) ≡ (AC −
→ DB)
Informally, this product says that to combine stabilizer flows around a gate you should nest the
stabilizer flows inside of each other. Note the reversed order on the right hand side of the arrow.
H
H
Also note that computing the product can introduce scalars, for example (X −→ Z) · (Z −→ X) =
Accepted in Quantum 2023-07-12, click title to verify

41

Gate
I
X
Y
Z
H
S
HY Z
CXY Z
InitZ
InitX
ResetZ
ResetX
MeasureZ
MeasureX
DestructiveMeasureZ
DestructiveMeasureX

Generators
X→X

Gate

Z→Z
X→X

CNOT

Z → −Z
X → −X
Z → −Z
X → −X
Z→Z
X→Z

ISWAP

I → (−1)result · Z
X→X
I → (−1)result · X
Z → (−1)result
X → (−1)result

I, X, Y, Z

Z1 → Z1

√ √ †
H, Y , Y

Z2 → Z1
√

MZZ

X,

Z2 → Z2

SpiderX4

Z⇒Z
X⇒X

X , HY Z

CZY X
InitX
InitZ

Z2 Z3 → 1
X1 X2 X3 → 1
X1 X2 → 1

MeasureZ

X2 X3 → 1

DestructiveMeasureZ ,

X3 X4 → 1

PostSelectZ

Z⇒Y
X⇒Y
Z⇒X
X⇒Z
Z⇒Y
1⇒X
1⇒Z
Z⇒Z
I⇒Z
Z⇒1
X1 X2 ⇒ 1

Z1 Z2 Z3 Z4 → 1
X1 X2 → X1 X2
BellMeasure

†

CXY Z

X1 X2 → (−1)
Z1 Z2 → 1

Z⇒Z
X⇒Z
Z⇒X
X⇒Y

X1 X2 → X1 X2
result

SpiderZ3

√

Unsigned Generators
X⇒X

†

S, S , HXY

X1 → Z1 Y2
X2 → Z2 Y1
Z1 → Z1

Z→Z
X → −X

Z→X
1→Z
1→X
I→Z
I→X
Z→Z

Gate

X2 → X1
Z2 → Z1 Z2
Z1 → Z2

Z→X
X→Y

Z→Y
X→Y

Generators
X1 → X1 X2

BellMeasure

Z1 Z2 → Z1 Z2
X1 X2 → (−1)resultXX

Z1 Z2 ⇒ 1
1 ⇒ X1 X2
1 ⇒ Z1 Z2

Z1 Z2 → (−1)resultZZ

Table A.1: Stabilizer flow generators and unsigned stabilizer generators for various operations expressible in the
stabilizer formalism. The HY Z gate is a 180 degree rotation around Y + Z. The CXY Z gate is a 120 degree
rotation around X + Y + Z. The Spider gates correspond to phase-free ZX calculus nodes, and assume each
edge is considered to be an incoming qubit.
H

H

(−iY −→ −iY ) = (Y −→ −Y ).
Because stabilizer flows form a group, we need only specify a few generating stabilizer flows,
from which the others can be obtained by the group product.
Finally we note that there are a few other ways of generating stabilizer flows:
Definition A.4. Stabilizer flow chaining:
h g
i h
i
g
h
h
A−
→B−
→ C ≡ (A −
→ B) ∧ (B −
→ C)
Lemma A.5. Gates can be composed in series by folding chains:
g

h

hg

(A −
→B−
→ C) =⇒ (A −→ C)
Lemma A.6. Gates can be composed in parallel by the tensor product
h
i h
i
g1 ⊗h2
g
h
(A1 ⊗ C2 ) −−−−→ (B1 ⊗ D2 ) = (A −
→ B) ∧ (C −
→ D)
All stabilizer flow generators for Clifford operations can be found by looking in the Clifford
operation’s stabilizer tableau. The tableau describes how single-qubit X and Z terms are transformed [AG04; Gid21], and these transformations directly correspond to stabilizer flow generators.
Stabilizer flows are useful beyond tableaus because stabilizer flows can express the function of
dissipative gates such as initialization and measurement.

A.2 Unsigned Stabilizers
When working with stabilizers, the exact sign of the stabilizer is often not relevant. Algorithmic
decisions often depend only on whether or not two stabilizers commute, and commutation is independent of sign. This is because, as Aaronson notes in the context of the computational complexity
Accepted in Quantum 2023-07-12, click title to verify

42

of stabilizer circuits [Aar22]: “The key observation is that the phases never feed back into the rest
of the computation. Stabilizer operations can cause the phases to change, but a phase update
never causes any other part of the tableau to change.".
In addition to often being irrelevant, the signs of stabilizers are the most costly values to
compute. For example, suppose you are given a stabilizer tableau T corresponding to an n-qubit
Clifford operation C, and told to use T to compute the preimage of X0 (the Pauli product before
C that is equivalent to X0 after C). All terms of this Pauli product can be computed in Θ(n)
time, except the sign, which takes Θ(n2 ) time.
Because of the low utility and high cost of tracking signs, it’s often useful to take a view that
completely ignores the signs. Many things become simpler in this unsigned view. For example,
although the X gate has stabilizer generators X → X and Z → −Z while the I gate has different
stabilizer generators X → X and Z → Z, the differences are only in the signs. From the unsigned
perspective, Pauli gates can be ignored as if they were identity gates.
Definition A.7. To indicate that a stabilizer flow is unsigned, we will use a double arrow:
i
h g
i h
g
A=
⇒ B ≡ ∃f : A −
→ B · (−1)f (measurementsg )
Here f is a function that must predict which signed stabilizer is in effect based on the measurements performed by g. Note that this definition means measurement results can be omitted when
MZ
specifying unsigned stabilizers. For example, MZ has the signed stabilizer 1 −−→
(−1)result · Z and
M

therefore, by setting f to the identity function, has the unsigned stabilizer 1 ==Z⇒ Z. This means
M

M

that, in the unsigned view, measurement is generated by 1 ==Z⇒ Z and Z ==Z⇒ 1. It looks like,
and can be analyzed as if it were, a deterministic process.
Working with unsigned stabilizers removes time dependencies. The direction of time normally
matters because dissipative operations like resets and measurements have no time reversed equivalent. In the unsigned view, these operations do have time reversed equivalents. For example, the
time reversed variant of an initialization is a measurement that discards the qubit. One has the
generator 1 ⇒ Z while the other has the generator Z ⇒ 1. This insensitivity to the direction of
time makes tasks simpler, and is particularly well suited for diagrammatic systems such as the ZX
calculus where there isn’t a prescribed time direction.

A.3 Stabilizer flows form a group
In this subsection we go through the proof that stabilizer flows form a group. This is presented for
completeness, but can be easily skipped.
Lemma A.8. The stabilizer flows of a gate form a group.
Proof. More formally the set is the set of stabilizer flows and the group operation is the group
g
product between stabilizer flows defined above. Identity element: the identity element is I −
→ I.
Note that this is always defined, even when the I on the left hand side of the arrow is a different
dimension than the I on the right had side of the arrow. Inverse elements: the inverse element of
g
g
→ B −1 , and every Pauli operator has an inverse. Associative product: if x, y, z are
A−
→ B is A−1 −
stabilizer flows of g then (xy)z = x(yz) because the product definition reduces these expressions
into expressions with associative matrix products. Closed product: if x, y are stabilizer flows of g
then xy is also a stabilizer flow of g because the right hand side of the required equality can be
rewritten first using x then using y to transform it into the left hand side.

A.4 Detecting Regions
As we discuss at length in the text, detecting regions are a useful primitive concept for understanding quantum error correction circuits. Here, we elaborate on the formal definitions we use
for circuits and for detecting regions.
Similar to Gottesman[Got22], we regard the circuit as a set of locations related by gates stabilizers. A detecting region is then a list of circuit locations decorated by Pauli terms, or equivalently
Accepted in Quantum 2023-07-12, click title to verify

43

a set of pairs of a location and a Pauli term. A detecting region must satisfy the stabilizer flow
for any locations related by a stabilizer flow. At a measurement, the detecting region may satisfy
either stabilizer flow for a measurement, either transiting through that measurement (Z → Z), or
terminating on that measurement (Z → I or I → Z). A detector is the set of measurements that
a detecting region terminates on. We also say that a detecting region terminates on any reset,
initialization, or destructive measurement it touches.

A.5 KAK Decomposition and equivalence
The KAK decomposition [KG00; Tuc05] decomposes any two qubit unitary U into single qubit
gates and three commuting interactions parameterized by real numbers. When U is known to be
a Clifford operation, the three parameterized interactions can be reduced to two interactions that
are either included or excluded [Cór+13]:
U = (A ⊗ B) · CZa · SWAPb · (C ⊗ D)
where A, B, C, D are single qubit Cliffords and a, b are bits. Operations with the same a, b bits
kak
are KAK-equivalent (==). On a machine with good single qubit operations, all KAK-equivalent
interactions are effectively interchangeable.
There are four classes of KAK-equivalent Clifford gates. The identity-like gates (a = 0, b = 0),
the CNOT-like gates (a = 1, b = 0), the SWAP-like gates (a = 0, b = 1), and the ISWAP-like gates
(a = 1, b = 1). For example, the Mølmer–Sørensen gate [MS99] is CNOT-like:
√
X ⊗ X = (H ⊗ H) · CZ · ((S · H) ⊗ (S · H))
kak

== (I ⊗ H) · CZ · (I ⊗ H)
= CNOT
while a CNOT paired with a SWAP is ISWAP-like:
CNOT · SWAP = (I ⊗ H) · CZ · SWAP · (H ⊗ I)
kak

== (S ⊗ S) · CZ · SWAP
= ISWAP
Identity-like or swap-like gates are inappropriate for compiling QEC circuits because these gates
aren’t sufficient to create entanglement. There are many papers that use CNOT-like gates to build
the surface code circuits. In Section 4, we present a circuit for the surface code using ISWAP-like
gates.

B Constructs for the Repetition Code
In the main text, we discussed the repetition code only briefly when introducing detecting regions.
In practice, we developed the walking and ISWAP constructions on the simpler case of the repetition
code before we progressed to the surface code. We include these constructions here for their
pedagogical value. As previously noted, the overlapping structure of detecting regions is easier to
visualize in the 2D-space-time of the repetition code.

B.1 The Stepping Repetition Code
As we have already noted in Figure 3, the repetition code also features a half-cycle state where
all qubits are involved in code stabilizers. As with the surface code state, there are many ways to
map the half-cycle state to a state appropriate for measuring the stabilizers.
We can approach the circuit for the repetition code as going from half-cycle to half-cycle rather
than end-cycle to end-cycle. First, the circuit maps half of the half-cycle stabilizers to one-body
stabilizers that can be measured, and then reconstructs the half-cycle state. This makes clear that
any strategy that measures half the stabilizers in the half-cycle state and then reconstructs that
Accepted in Quantum 2023-07-12, click title to verify

44

state is a reasonable cycle circuit, regardless of whether the state is reconstructed on the same
physical qubits. The simplicity of the repetition code allows us to consider all possible cycles that
achieve this, as shown in Figure B.1a. We see that in addition to the two equivalent standard cycles
for the bit flip repetition code, there are two other non-trivial cycles which involve constructing
and deconstructing the half cycle stabilizers onto different qubits.
Allowing the freedom to use any of these four cycles makes what we call step code circuits.
These are logically equivalent to the repetition code, and are decoded in the same way. Similar
to the walking circuits for the surface code, the step code circuits permit the freedom to move
the code a distance up to 1 physical qubit in either direction in each cycle. Figure B.1b shows an
example of a step code circuit.

B.2 CXSWAP Repetition Code
We can similarly use freedom in the shape of detecting regions to provide cycle circuits that use
CXSWAP gates instead of CX gates. This substitution also allows both standard circuits that
preserve measure and data qubit roles, and stepping cycles where they are exchanged. This is
illustrated in Figure B.2.

Accepted in Quantum 2023-07-12, click title to verify

45

a) Repetition code cycle circuits and relevant detecting regions

Standard
Down

Standard
Up

M

R

M

R

M
Stepping
Down

R

R

Stepping
Up

M

M
R
M

R

b) All detecting regions for a distance-3 code using both standard and stepping cycles

R
R

H
M

R

R
R

M

M
M

H

Z
R

R

R

R

R

M
M

M
M

R

R

R

R

M
M

Z
M

M

R

M

Z

R

M
M

M

Figure B.1: Repetition code circuits with stepping. The bit-flip repetition code can also be implemented
using a wider variety of cycles than are typically used. a) Four possible cycle circuits. The Standard cycles
are equivalent typical circuits for the bit-flip code. The Stepping cycles measure the same stabilizers as the
standard cycle, but the qubits that are measured are not the same qubits that were reset at the beginning of the
cycle. This effectively exchanges the roles of data and measure qubits. b) All detecting regions for a distance-3
step code. In order, the cycles are [Standard Down, Step Down, Step Down, Step Up, Standard Down]. The
combination of these cycles produces a variety of shapes of detecting regions, but their size and overlapping
structure is the same as for the standard repetition code. Note the inclusion of effective X-basis measurement
and Z-basis classical feedback at boundaries being stepped away from; these correct the distance-1 X observable,
and are unnecessary when considering the repetition code as a classical code. By combining various cycles, the
repetition code state can step in either direction by one physical qubit per cycle.

Accepted in Quantum 2023-07-12, click title to verify

46

a) Repetition code cycle circuits using CXSWAP and relevant detecting regions

R

M

Standard
Down

R

Standard
Up

M

R

M

R

M

M

M
R
Stepping
Down

Stepping
Up

M

R
M
R

R

M

M

b) All detecting regions for a distance-3 code using both standard and stepping cycles

R

H

M

R

Z

R

M

R

H

M
H

Z
R

M

R

R
R

M

M
M

R

M

H

Z
R

M
M

R

R

M

M

R

M
M

R
R

M

Figure B.2: Repetition code circuits with CXSWAP gates. The bit-flip repetition code can also be implemented using CXSWAP gates. a) Four possible cycle circuits. The Standard cycles preserve qubit roles, while
the stepping cycles exchange qubit roles. b) All detecting regions for a distance-3 step code. In order, the
cycles are [Standard Down, Standard Down, Step up, Standard Up]. The combination of these cycles produces
a variety of shapes of detecting regions, but their size and overlapping structure is the same as for the standard
repetition code. Note the inclusion of effective X-basis measurement and Z-basis classical feedback at boundaries being stepped away from; these correct the distance-1 X observable, and are unnecessary when considering
the repetition code as a classical code.

Accepted in Quantum 2023-07-12, click title to verify

47

C Sliding Surface Codes for Logical Compilation
In Section 5, we focused on explaining the walking circuit and describing its benefits in simplifying
hardware. The capability of walking logical patches also provides new possible freedoms at a higher
level, presenting a new primitive operation at the level of lattice surgery which can permit some
logical operations to be cheaper. Here, we detail one such application, using the sliding behaviour
to perform a lateral shift on a densely packed register of logical qubit patches.
In algorithms compiled down to lattice surgery primitives, shifting a dense linear register of
logical qubit patches is a common and desirable operation [GE21]. A typical use case is when
processing register bits iteratively, treating the register as a queue to be consumed; here, being
able to shift the register enables the compilation to operate on the least-significant bit and then
shift the register, rather than needing to operate on each bit in its original location.
However, register shifting is not a very natural operation in lattice surgery, as the shifting of
each logical patch must be done serially, as shown in Figure C.1a. For a linear register of N logical
patches with cost distance d attempting to shift S patch distances along its length, the naive total
cost of this strategy in space-time volume is N (N + S) = N 2 + N S in units of d3 . This operation
has a cost quadratic in the size of the register, and is particularly expensive for shifting a large
register over a short distance.
Comparatively, we can use the sliding circuit for 2d cycles to shift all the logical patches in
parallel by a distance d, as shown in Figure C.1b. This requires the existence of an additional qubit
row parallel to the direction of shifting for the walking circuit to execute, but does not effect the
overall volume consumed by the register as it walks, especially if surrounding patches are wiggling
in-phase with the sliding. This can greatly reduces the cost of some logical compilations, such as
using a large register as a FIFO queue.
Time

Total Volume
= (N2+NS) d3

Total Volume
= 2NS d3

N

S

N

S

Figure C.1: Cost comparison for register shifting using lattice surgery vs using sliding. Left: A 2D projection
of the naive strategy using lattice surgery expansions and contractions to shift a logical register of N = 6 qubits
by a distance S = 1, consuming (N 2 + N S) space-time blocks each d × d × d in volume. Right: the same
operation achieved using the sliding behaviour on all patches making up the register, consuming only 2N S
space-time blocks. For shifts S < N , this strategy lowers the overall space-time cost.

Accepted in Quantum 2023-07-12, click title to verify

48

D Numerical Benchmarking and Noise Model
For numerical benchmarking of our constructions, we use Stim [Gid21]. In the main text, we
compile the relevant circuit for superconducting hardware using CZ gates, and use the SI1000 noise
model introduced in [GNM22]. This noise model is inspired by the hardware errors experienced
by superconducting transmon qubit arrays. Here, we augment this error model with an ISWAP
gate with the same leading fidelity. This elides any different in fidelity between performing a CZ
or ISWAP gate, whereas we expect the error models in hardware to be noticeably different.
Other constructions using CNOT or entangling measurements are benchmarked using the simpler UniformDepolarizing noise model, which does not have ratios of errors adjusted to minic
real devices. The definitions of the noise operations in all three models are given in Table D.1, and
the models themselves are detailed in Table D.2.
The code used to run the numerical simulations is included in our data and code repository [MBG23]. We used the Sinter interface and took up to 1 × 108 shots for each circuit implementation, completing early if we collected 1 × 103 logical errors for a specific circuit case.
For decoding, we used an internal decoder that performs correlated-error-aware minimum weight
perfect matching [Goo+22]. We combined the decoded results for memory experiments in the X
and Z basis individually into statistics for a combined XZ basis by projecting the likelihood that
neither X nor Z bases experience a logical error. The benchmarking for all circuits collectively
took 65345126 core-seconds in total, which is just over 2 core-years. It executed in a little under
a 8 days on a 96 core machine.
To produce the teraquop footprint, we fit a line to the XZ logical error rate versus code distance
to extrapolate to a logical error rate of 1 × 10−12 to find the code distance and therefore footprint
required, which we plot as the teraquop footprint in the main text. Our plots generally include
maximum likelihood highlighting to indicate confidence in our numerical estimates. In the plots of
logical error rate and lambda, these correspond to the region of hypotheses up to 1000 times less
likely than the maximum likelihood hypothesis. In the plots of teraquop footprint, these correspond
to how far each point can be moved by using line fits whose least-squares error terms are at most
1.0 higher than the error term for the optimal least-squares fit when fitting against the natural log
of the logical error rates. The procedures we used for producing these envelopes are also included
in our code repository.
Noisy Gate
AnyClifford2 (p)
AnyClifford1 (p)
RZ (p)
RX (p)
MZ (p, q)
MX (p, q)
MP P (p, q)

Idle(p)
ResonatorIdle(p)

Definition
Any two-qubit Clifford gate, followed by a two-qubit depolarizing channel of strength p.
Any one-qubit Clifford gate, followed by a one-qubit depolarizing channel of strength p.
Initialize the qubit as |0⟩, followed by a bitflip channel of strength p.
Initialize the qubit as |+⟩, followed by a phaseflip channel of strength p.
Measure the qubit in the Z-basis, followed by a one-qubit depolarizing channel of strength p,
and flip the value of the classical measurement result with probability q.
Measure the qubit in the X-basis, followed by a one-qubit depolarizing channel of strength p,
and flip the value of the classical measurement result with probability q.
Measure a Pauli product P P on a pair of qubits,
followed by a two-qubit depolarizing channel of strength p,
and flip the classically reported measurement value with probability q.
If the qubit is not used in this time step, apply a one-qubit depolarizing channel of strength p.
If the qubit is not measured or reset in a time step during which other qubits are
being measured or reset, apply a one-qubit depolarizing channel of strength p.

Table D.1: Modified from [GNM22]. Noise channels and the rules used to apply them. Noisy rules stack with
each other - for example, Idle(p) and ResonatorIdle(p) can both apply depolarizing channels in the same time
step.

Accepted in Quantum 2023-07-12, click title to verify

49

Name

Noisy Gateset

Uniform
Depolarizing

Superconducting
Inspired (SI1000)

CX(p)
CXSWAP(p)
AnyClifford1 (p)
RZ/X (p)
MZ/X (p, p)
MP P (p, p)
Idle(p)

CZ(p)
ISWAP(p)
AnyClifford1 (p/10)
InitZ (2p)
MZ (p, 5p)
MZZ (p, 5p)
Idle(p/10)
ResonatorIdle(2p)

Table D.2: Modified from [GNM22]. Details of the error models used in this paper. Circuits compiled for CX or
CXSWAP gates are benchmarked using UniformDepolarizing. Circuits compiled for CZ or ISWAP gates are
benchmarked using SI1000. The superconducting-inspired acronym refers to an expected cycle time of about
1000 nanoseconds for the standard surface code circuit cycle [Goo+21; Goo+22]. See Table D.1 for definitions
of the noisy gates.

E Further Benchmarking
In this section, we present benchmarking for each of the constructions listed in Table 1.
We provide teraquop footprints for each circuit in groups sharing an error model. Figure E.1
includes all planar circuits using CZ or ISWAP gates and benchmarked using the SI1000 error
model. Figure E.2 includes all planar circuits using CX or CXSWAP gates and benchmarked
using the UniformDepolarizing error model. Figure E.3 includes all toric circuits using CX
gates, benchmarked using the UniformDepolarizing error model. Finally, Figure E.4 includes all
circuits using entangling measurements. As detailed in Appendix D, our noise models both treat
entangling measurements as having the same depolarizing error as two qubit gates, so circuits using
entangling measurements perform significantly better than circuits using only two qubits gates.
In the ancillary files available with the paper, and in the data repository [MBG23], we additionally provide a set of supplementary figures. For each circuit, we provide a visualization of the
circuit schedule, a plot of the logical error versus physical error rate and the logical error rate
versus code distance. The circuit schedules were automatically generated using Stim’s diagram
functionality, and can be reproduced from the circuits also included in the data repository. The
raw data for the benchmarking plots, and the code that produces them, is also available in our
code repository.

Accepted in Quantum 2023-07-12, click title to verify

50

Figure E.1: Teraquop footprints for planar circuits using the SI1000 error model. The number of physical
qubits required for a single code patch to achieve a logical error rate of 1 × 10−12 over a d × d × d space-time
block. Each curve averages memory experiments in both Z and X basis, and uses the SI1000 noise model as
described in Appendix D. Circuit details for each curve are included in Table 1.

Accepted in Quantum 2023-07-12, click title to verify

51

Figure E.2: Teraquop footprints for planar circuits using the UniformDepolarizing error model. The
number of physical qubits required for a single code patch to achieve a logical error rate of 1 × 10−12 over a
d × d × d space-time block. Each curve averages memory experiments in both Z and X basis, and uses the
UniformDepolarizing noise model as described in Appendix D. Circuit details for each curve are included in
Table 1.

Accepted in Quantum 2023-07-12, click title to verify

52

Figure E.3: Teraquop footprints for circuits benchmarked with toric boundary conditions. The number
of physical qubits required for a single code patch to achieve a logical error rate of 1 × 10−12 over a d ×
d × d space-time block. Each curve averages memory experiments in both Z and X basis, and uses the
UniformDepolarizing noise model as described in Appendix D. Circuit details for each curve are included in
Table 1.

Accepted in Quantum 2023-07-12, click title to verify

53

Figure E.4: Teraquop footprints for circuits benchmarked with hybrid entangling operations. The number
of physical qubits required for a single code patch to achieve a logical error rate of 1×10−12 over a d×d×d spacetime block. Each curve averages memory experiments in both Z and X basis. 3-CZ_MZZ uses the SI1000 noise
model, 3-CX_MZZ_MXX and TORIC-3-CX_MZZ_MXX use the UniformDepolarizing noise model, as described in
Appendix D. Circuit details for each curve are included in Table 1. Note that TORIC-3-CX_MZZ_MXX has no data
point for p = 1 × 10−4 ; No errors were sampled for distances above d = 4, so extrapolation to the teraquop
regime was not possible.

Accepted in Quantum 2023-07-12, click title to verify

54

F Crumble Links
As explained in Section 2.5, we made extensive use of a prototype interactive circuit editor named
Crumble in exploring and constructing the circuits we presented. Crumble can import arbitrary
Stim circuits, but also supports additional visualization such as drawing colored polygons and
marking and propagating Pauli flows. This appendix aims to serve as a convenient jumping off
point for using Crumble for exploring our cycle circuits. The following links open Crumble with
one of the benchmarked circuits from Table 1 already imported and with a single detecting region
marked. For other circuits, such as with higher distance or other circuit styles from Table 1, we
recommend importing the Stim circuit file directly into Crumble. The circuit files are included in
the data repository (zenodo.org/record/7587578) or can be produced using the code repository
(https://github.com/Strilanc/midout).
Crumble link for 4-CX Circuit.
Crumble link for 3-CX Circuit.
Crumble link for 4-CXSWAP Circuit.
Crumble link for CX-GLIDING Circuit.

Accepted in Quantum 2023-07-12, click title to verify

55

