Integrated Modelling of Cell Responses after Irradiation for DNA-Targeted
Effects and Non-Targeted Effects
Yusuke Matsuya, Kohei Sasaki, Yuji Yoshii, Go Okuyama and Hiroyuki Date

SPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION
I. Deduction of cell survival formula after irradiation with a constant dose rate
The derivation of the model for TEs is described below. Equation 2 is substituted into Eq. 3 for each period of
time (T). The accumulated number of LLs per domain is given by
(

)

(

)
(SI-1)

{

 ]

[

}

where
(SI-2)
Let <wd> the average number of wd per domain, thus average number of LLs per cell nucleus <w>T is
expressed as
〈 〉

〈 〉
*(

+

)

(SI-3)

 ]

[
where
〈 〉 ∫

(SI-4)

〈 〉
〈
〈

〈 〉 ∫

〉

∫

〉
〈

〈
〉〈

(SI-5)

〉

(SI-6)
〉
∫

∫

(SI-7)
∫

(SI-8)

Here, p is the average number of domains per cell nucleus; fz(zn) is the probability density of the specific
1

energy for each period;

represents the radiation quality including the microdosimetric parameter yD

[keV/m]; fg(gn) is the probability density of the domain having a DNA amount gn per domain, and ’≡B/p
and n=<gn2>/<gn>2 (dimensionless parameter). Assuming that the DNA amount per nucleus does not change
within a short period of irradiation time (i.e., n=0=constant and n=nm=0=constant) in the constant
absorbed dose rate ̇ during irradiation time T [h] (<z1>=<z2>=, … , =<zN>= ̇ Δ ), we have
〈 〉

) ̇

[(

[

( ̇ ) ]
 ]( ̇ 

(SI-9)

)

Taking the limit of N to infinity and assuming that the number of LLs per nucleus follows the Poisson
distribution in the same manner as the hit probability in the Linear-Quadratic (LQ) model (1), Eq. AI-8 is
transformed as follows:
(

)

(

)

[

]
(SI-10)

.
As described in the manuscript, the Lea-Catcheside time factor F1 is included in Eq. (SI-10). Relation between
irradiation time T [h] and the time factor F characterizes the cell-specific dose-rate effects on dose-response
curve and linearity of the curve in high-dose range. Figure S1 shows the examples of the time factor and
dose-rate effects on cell survival curve.

Fig. S1. Model performance of dose-rate effects: (A) for the relationship between irradiation time T [h]
and the Lea-Catcheside time factor F in various cells of CHO, irs-20, V79-379A, T-47D, HSG, MT and
HX3; (B) and (C) for dose-response curve for mammary carcinoma and human melanoma for various
dose rates, respectively. The (a+c) values as SLD repair rate were taken from the previous reports2-4 and
fitting experimental data in this study. In Figs. S1(B) and S1(C), the DNA-targeted modelling in the
present model was compared with the experimental data reported by Trevor et al 5. The lines and symbols
represent the results predicted by the model and experimental data, respectively.

2

II. Procedure of maximum likelihood method with a Monte Carlo technique
The response parameters for signals, DSB kinetics and cell survival in this manuscript were determined by a
maximum likelihood method with a Monte Carlo technique. We used a following formula as a likelihood
function.

,
where

√

-

(SI-11)

is the likelihood function , N is the number of experimental data,  is the standard deviation of

experimental value, Exp stands for the experimental value and Mod for the value calculated by the model.
Based on Eq. (SI-11) and the algorithm illustrated in Fig. S2, we determined the set of model parameters for
describing cell responses of signal, DSB kinetics and cell survival.

Fig. S2. Algorithm of the maximum likelihood method used in this study. We assumed that experimental
value follows normal distribution, and the likelihood was calculated by using the likelihood function by
Eq. (SI-11). In this study, we set that the sampling number Ns is equal to 107.
III. Evaluation of log of cell surviving fraction per dose by IMK model
As described in the results, we compared the log of cell survival (ln S) by the IMK model with experimental
3

data as a function of absorbed dose. In addition, here we show the log of cell survival per absorbed dose ( ln
S/D) by the IMK model. The log of cell survival per dose means the average number of lethal lesions per cell
induced per unit absorbed dose in this model. The survival rate in this way enables us to evaluate a more
realistic appreciation of the dose-response curve than that with the usual semi-log plot of surviving fraction
versus dose. By using the experimental data and the curve shown in Fig. 2(C) and 2(D), we checked the model
performance about the low-dose hyper-radiosensitivity (HRS) again. Figure S3 shows the log of cell survival
per dose versus dose in V79-379A and T-47D cell lines. In this figure, the curve by the IMK model
considering the DNA-targeted effects (TEs) and intercellular communication (IC) agrees much better with the
experimental data than that by the MK model considering only the DNA-TEs in terms of R2 value.

Fig. S3. Log of cell survival per dose as a function of dose in comparison with the experimental data
summarized in Figs. 4(C) and 4(D), and the prediction curve by the present model: (A) for the Chinese
Hamster lung fibroblast V79-379A cell line and (B) for the human breast tumour T-47D cell line. The line
and symbol represent the curve by the model and experimental data, respectively. The R2 value was
calculated by Eq. (27).

IV. Similarities and differences compared to previous models
In the present model, the LQ relation is defined as an alternative function to the threshold-like expression
or multi-targeted theory. Kundrát et al. modelled the mutation induction of bystander effects according to the
Gompertz law6. Contrary to their study, in our study there is little discussion on the induction of mutation with
the bystander effect. Nevertheless, assuming that the damage induction in non-hit cells is proportional to
signal concentration, our model well reproduces the kinetic curves of signals and DSB number as shown in
Fig. 2(B). Although further investigations are necessary for evaluating the signal-induced mutation (damage)
mechanism, it is likely that the damage induction by NTEs is proportional to signal concentration as well as
4

the target activation number in the hit cells for emitting signals
The present model considering the signal-induced damage in non-hit cells is similar to the Bystander and
Direct (BaD) model7 or the ByStander Diffusion Modelling (BSDM) model8. In the BSDM model, the
number of bystander cells killed is equivalent to the fraction of non-hit cells receiving specific cell-to-cell
signals from a directly inactivated cell. By taking account of the fraction of non-hit cells, the IMK model can
exhibit clearly the characteristics of a low-dose HRS and an involvement of the repair efficiency (Figs. 2(C)
and 2(D) and Fig. 4).
REFERENCES
1. Brenner DJ. The linear-quadratic model is an appropriate methodology for determining isoeffective doses at
large doses per fraction. Semin. Radiat. Oncol. 18: 234–239 (2008).
2. Hawkins RB. A microdosimetric-kinetic model of cell death from exposure to ionizing radiation of any LET,
with experimental and clinical applications. Int. J. Radiat. Biol. 69:739–55 (1996).
3. Inaniwa T, Suzuki M, Furukawa T, Kase Y, Kanematsu N et al. Effects of dose-delivery time structure on
biological effectiveness for therapeutic carbon-ion beams evaluated with microdosimetric kinetic model.
Radiat. Res. 180:44–59 (2013).
4. Matsuya Y, Tsutsumi K, Sasaki K, Date H. Evaluation of the cell survival curve under radiation exposure
based on the kinetics of lesions in relation to dose-delivery time. J. Radiat. Res. 56:90-99 (2015).
5. Trevor CS, John JE, John HP, G. Gordon S. Split-dose and low dose-rate recovery in four experimental
tumour systems. Int. J. Radiat. Biol., 52(1): 157-170 (1987).
6. Kundrát P, Friedland W. Friedland W. Mechanistic modelling of radiation-induced bystander effects. Radiat.
Prot. Dos. 166:148-151(2015).
7. Brenner DJ, Little JB, Sachs RK. The bystander effect in radiation oncogenesis: II. A quantitative model.
Radiat. Res. 155(3): 402-408 (2001).
8. Nikjoo H, Khvostunov IK. Biophysical model of the radiation-induced bystander effect. Int. J. Radiat. Biol.
79(1): 43-52 (2003).

5

