Tensor-Network Simulations of the Surface Code under Realistic Noise
Andrew S. Darmawan and David Poulin
Département de Physique & Institut Quantique, Université de Sherbrooke, Québec, Canada
(Dated: August 2, 2017)

these approximations can be very poor as we will show
below.
In this work, we import quantum many-body methods
developed in the context of solid-state physics to study
quantum error correction with realistic, non-Clifford
noise models. Our construction hinges on the fact
that the surface code is a projected-entangled-pair state
(PEPS) with low bond dimension [7]. As a basic demonstration, we use our method to simulate the surface code
under two non-Clifford local noise models: amplitude
damping and systematic rotation. We assume that syndrome measurements are performed perfectly. We obtain
thresholds for these noise models and also study error correction in the region of practical interest, where the noise
strength is low relative to the threshold. These results are
compared with those obtained using standard Pauli approximations, and significant discrepancies are observed.
We have performed exact simulations on codes of up to
153 data qubits, while in contrast, previous studies using brute-force simulations were limited to 13 data qubits
and 12 syndrome qubits [4].
Tensor networks.
— For our purposes, a tensor
Ai1 ,i2 ,...,in is an n-index array of complex numbers, where
ik runs from 0 to Dk − 1, where Dk is called the bond
dimension of ik . We represent a tensor graphically as a
box and each index of the tensor as an edge emanating
from that box. When two tensors are linked by an edge,
the connected indices are summed over; for instance,
X
↵

i1

A↵,i1 ,i2 ,... B↵,j1 ,j2 ,... =

i2

A

j1
α

B

j2

...

Introduction. — The working principle behind quantum
error correction is to “fight entanglement with entanglement,” i.e., protect the data against local interaction with
the environment by encoding them into delocalized degrees of freedom of a many-body system. Thus, characterizing a fault-tolerant scheme is ultimately a problem
of quantum many-body physics.
While simulating quantum many-body systems is
generically hard, particular systems have additional
structure that can be taken advantage of. For example, free-fermion Hamiltonians have algebraic properties
that make them exactly solvable. An analogy in stabilizer quantum error correction is Pauli noise, where errors
are Pauli operators drawn from some fixed distribution.
Because of their algebraic structure, Pauli noise models
can be simulated efficiently using the stabilizer formalism [1]. Beyond Pauli noise, noise composed of Clifford
gates and projections onto Pauli eigenstates can also be
simulated efficiently using the same methods [2].
While such efficiently simulable noise models can be
useful to benchmark fault-tolerant schemes, they do not
represent most models of practical interest. For instance,
qubits that are built out of nondegenerate energy eigenstates are often subject to relaxation, a.k.a. amplitude
damping. Miscalibrations often result in systematic errors corresponding to small unitary rotations [3]. Given
that these processes do not have efficient descriptions
within the stabilizer formalism, understanding how a
given fault-tolerant scheme will respond to them is a difficult and important problem.
The simplest approach to such many-body problems
is brute-force simulation, where an arbitrary state in
Hilbert space is represented as an exponentially large
vector of coefficients. Using such methods, small surface
codes (up to distance 3) have been simulated under nonClifford noise [4]. In another study, brute-force simulation of the seven-qubit Steane code was performed without concatenation [5]. Simulation of such low distance
codes allows comparison of noise at the logical level to
the noise on the physical level; however, it is difficult to
infer quantities of interest such as thresholds or overheads
from such small simulations. Another approach, akin
to the use of tight-binding approximations in solid-state
physics, is to approximate these noise processes with efficiently simulable ones [2, 6]. However, the accuracy of

...

arXiv:1607.06460v2 [quant-ph] 1 Aug 2017

The surface code is a many-body quantum system, and simulating it in generic conditions is
computationally hard. While the surface code is believed to have a high threshold, the numerical
simulations used to establish this threshold are based on simplified noise models. We present a
tensor-network algorithm for simulating error correction with the surface code under arbitrary local
noise. We use this algorithm to study the threshold and the subthreshold behavior of the amplitudedamping and systematic rotation channels. We also compare these results to those obtained by
making standard approximations to the noise models.

.

It will often be convenient to group multiple indices together, using the notation Ai1 ,i2 ,...,in = Ai where a bold
subscript is taken to mean that the index is composed of
multiple indices.
We define an N -particle PEPS |ψi to be a quantum state whose tensor of coefficients ψi1 ,i2 ...iN =
hi1 , . . . , iN |ψi is the contraction of a network of N ten(1)
(2)
(N )
sors T = {Ai1 ,α1 , Ai2 ,α2 , . . . , AiN ,αN }, each of which has
one physical index labeled i and some number of virtual
indices labeled α. We assume that the physical particles
have dimension d, that each virtual index has bond dimension D, and that the number of virtual indices per

2
tensor in T is less than a constant n. This implies that
the tensor-network description of |ψi is memory efficient:
While the tensor ψi1 ,i2 ...iN has dN entries, each tensor in
T has at most dDn entries and thus the whole set T can
be specified with only N dDn complex numbers.
Surface code tensor network. — We consider the optimized layout of the surface code introduced in [8], where
qubits are placed on the vertices of a W Q
× L rectangular lattice and x-check operators Af = i∈f Xi and
Q
z-check operators Bf = i∈f Zi are defined on alternating faces of the lattice in a checkerboard pattern. This
layout is illustrated in Supplemental Material III. The
logical qubit state |0iL is defined to be the simultaneous
+1 eigenspace of all check operators and of the logical
operator Z, where Z is a string of Z’s along the left
boundary of the code. Likewise, the state |1iL is fixed by
all check operators but is a −1 eigenstate of Z; it can be
obtained as X|0iL , where X is a product of X operators
along the bottom boundary of the code. Given that the
product state |0i⊗N has nonzero overlap with |0iL , and
that |0i⊗N is a +1 eigenstate of every Bf and Z, we have
|0iL ∝

Y1
f

2

(I + Af )|0i⊗N ,

(1)

where 12 (I + Af ) is the projector onto the +1 eigenspace
of Af , and the product is taken over all x checks.
Let Wi,i0 ,α (C) be a tensor with two physical indices
i, i0 and an arbitrary number of virtual indices α =
α1 , α2 , . . . , which depends on a 2 × 2 matrix C. Each
index of W (C) has bond dimension two, and the only
nonzero entries of W (C) are
Wi,i0 ,0 (C) = δi,i0

and Wi,i0 ,1 (C) = Ci,i0 ,

(2)

where 0(1) means that all virtual indices are set to 0
(1), and the symbol δi,i0 denotes the Kronecker delta.
For convenience, we define Q± = W (±X) and R± =
W (±Z).
Consider the projector 12 (I + Af ) acting on particles
1,2,3, and 4 ordered clockwise around a face. It can easily
be verified that the tensor hi1 , i2 , i3 , i4 |I + Af |i01 , i02 , i03 , i04 i
can be expressed as a contraction of four tensors
X
+
+
+
Q+
(3)
i1 ,i0 ,α1 Qi2 ,i0 α1 ,α2 Qi3 ,i0 α2 ,α3 Qi4 ,i0 α3 .
α1 ,α2 ,α3

1

2

3

4

We remark that the tensor description for the projection
onto the −1 eigenspace of Af is identical to Eq. (3) but
with any one of the Q+ tensors replaced with Q− . Projections onto eigenspaces of Bf operators can be defined
analogously by replacing all Q’s with R’s. The tensor
network corresponding to the product of projectors in
Eq. (1), is obtained by overlapping the tensor projector
in Eq. (3) over the whole lattice.
The state |0iL is then obtained by applying this projector to the state |0i⊗N , which, in the tensor-network
picture, corresponds to fixing the second index to zero,

thus effectively removing it. A square-lattice tensor net(1)
(2)
(N )
work T = {Ai1 ,α1 , Ai2 ,α2 , . . . , AiN ,αN } for the state |0iL
is thus formed from contractions of Q+ tensors.
While this tensor network describes the logical |0iL
state, we need to be able to represent other states in
order to fully characterize the transformation of the encoded information during error correction. Specifically,
we want to compute the logical channel EL that is applied
to the logical qubit during a round of error correction. By
the Choi-Jamiolkowski isomorphism, this channel can be
inferred directly from the resulting output when a Bell
state of the form |Ψ+ i = |0iL |0ia + |1iL |1ia is input,
where the first qubit is encoded in a surface code and
is subject to error correction, while the second qubit is
unencoded and assumed to be noise free. We can obtain
a tensor-network description for |Ψ+ i by a simple modification to the tensor network describing |0iL . Consider
the tensor
X
+
+
Q+
CNOT :=
i1 ,i0 ,α1 Qi2 ,i0 α1 ,α2 . . . QiL ,i0 αL ,αa ,
α1 ,α2 ,...,αL

1

2

L

(4)
which can be thought of as an L qubit operator (expressed in tensor form) with a single uncontracted virtual
index αa , which we call the ancilla index. If αa is set to
0, then CNOT is simply the identity on its physical indices, while if αa = 1, CNOT is an L-fold tensor product
of X. Therefore if CNOT is applied to the bottom row of
the tensor network for |0iL , the resulting tensor-network
state ψi1 ,i2 ,...,iN ,αa = hi1 , i2 , . . . , iN , αa |ψi (which includes the ancilla index as a physical particle) will be
the desired Bell state |0iL |0ia + (X|0iL )|1ia = |Ψ+ i.
The above tensor-network definitions are for pure
states. However, as we will be considering nonunitary noise, we want a tensor-network description
for density matrices.
Given a tensor network
(1)
(2)
(N )
{Ai1 ,α1 , Ai2 ,α2 , . . . , AiN ,αN } for a pure state |ψi, we ob(1)

(2)

(N )

tain the tensor network {Bi1 ,α1 , Bi2 ,α2 , . . . , BiN ,αN } for
the density matrix hi1 , . . . , iN |ψihψ|i01 , . . . , i0N i by defin(k)
(k)
(k)∗
ing Bi,α = Ai,α0 Ai0 ,α00 , where i = i, i0 and α = α0 , α00
represent combined sets of physical and virtual indices
respectively. The resulting tensor network is illustrated
in Fig. 1a).
Simulation of error correction. — The evolution of the
tensor network during the error-correction simulation is
illustrated in Fig. 1. We start with the density matrix for
the half-encoded Bell state described above. The noisy
state is obtained by applying the desired CPTP map E
to every qubit in the code. This corresponds to the local
tensor update
X
Bi,i0 ,α ←
Eijj 0 i0 Bj,j 0 ,α ,
(5)
j,j 0

where Eijj 0 i0 := hi|E(|jihj 0 |)|i0 i, as depicted in Fig. 1(b).
During error correction, every check will be measured,
yielding a set of measurement outcomes s = (m1 , m2 , . . . )

3

FIG. 1: Simulation of error correction with the surface
code. a) The surface-code density operator as a tensor
network. The two additional indices on the bottom
right tensor are ancilla indices. b) Applying local noise
to the state. c) Applying a check projector Pk (red) to
the state. Green tensors have been involved in previous
check measurements, while blue tensors have not. d)
The resulting tensor network representing T r(Pk+1 ρk )
obtained by capping off pairs of physical indices.
corresponding to a syndrome s with probability ps =
T r(Πs ρ), where Πs is the projection onto the syndrome
subspace corresponding to s and ρ is the noisy code state.
We assume that measurements are performed perfectly.
In order to sample from the distribution ps we imagine
measuring checks sequentially. We can compute the conditional probability p(mk |m1 , m2 , . . . , mk−1 ) for any k as
follows. Let ρk be the state of the system after k check
measurements and let Pk+1 be the projection onto the +1
eigenspace of the k + 1 check. The probabilities of obtaining an outcome of 1 and −1 are given, respectively,
by q = T r(Pk+1 ρk ) and 1 − q. To obtain a tensor network for Pk+1 ρk , we apply the tensor corresponding to
the check projector to the tensor network of ρk as illustrated in Fig. 1c). For example, a four-qubit x check can
be decomposed as a contraction of four Q+ tensors, as in
Eq. (3). To apply the check to ρk we contract these Q+
tensors with the measured physical indices, specifically
X
Bi,i0 ,α ←
Q+
(6)
i,j,α0 Bj,i0 ,α00 ,
j

where the updated virtual indices α contain the original
virtual indices of B as well as those of the appended Q+ .
Then, toPevaluate q, we take the trace of every tensor
(Bα ← i Bi,i,α ). The resulting tensor network has no
physical indices and is illustrated in Fig. 1d). We then
contract all virtual indices in the network.
This last step corresponds to contracting a squarelattice tensor network. Generically, this problem is #P
complete, and therefore, no efficient algorithm is believed
to exist [9]. However, many efficient algorithms have been
developed to obtain approximate solutions to this problem [10–15]. In this work, we have used both an exact,
albeit inefficient, contraction algorithm and an efficient,
approximate contraction algorithm for finite-sized PEPS
with open boundary conditions [10].

To contract the tensor network exactly, we merge all
tensors of the left column into a single tensor and then
contract this sequentially with the remaining tensors
from left to right. The algorithm is inefficient because
the amount of memory required to store the tensor associated with a column is exponential in the lattice width.
We note, however, that we have used a number of optimizations to significantly improve the efficiently of the
algorithm. These are described in Supplemental Material
III. With exact contraction, the complexity of sampling
a single syndrome is O(W 4W ), and thus, the complexity of sampling all syndromes (and of the entire algorithm) is O(LW 2 4W ). For efficient, approximate contraction, we use a well-known algorithm described in
[16], which represents the contraction of the network as
the repeated multiplication of a matrix-product state by
matrix-product operators. This algorithm depends on an
accuracy parameter χ and contraction of the lattice takes
time O(LW χ3 ).
When all check outcomes have been obtained, we have
sampled a syndrome s from the distribution ps , and the
tensor network encodes a noisy state with appropriate
check projectors applied. The state is then returned to
the code space via a Pauli operator, which we choose to
be a product of X operators connecting each flipped Bf
check to the left boundary and Z connecting each flipped
Af check to the top boundary.
At this point, a classical algorithm, called the decoder,
is used to select one of four possible corrections I, X, Y , Z
to be applied to the state. The decoder uses information
about the syndrome and the noise model to select the
correction that minimizes the overall logical error. For
efficiency, this is usually only done approximately [17–
26]. In this work, we perform decoding by choosing the
correction that minimizes the distance between the computed logical channel and the identity. The entire procedure (application of noise, check measurements, returning to the code space, correction) yields a CPTP map
EL acting on the encoded qubit. The calculation of EL
as well as the decoding algorithm are performed using
essentially the same method as the syndrome sampling
and are described in detail in Supplementary Material I.
Numerical results. — Two non-Pauli noise models
are considered: systematic rotation about the z axis
ESR (ρ) = e−iθZ ρeiθZ , where θ ∈ [0, π) is the rotation anP
gle, and amplitude damping EAD (ρ) = i Ki ρKi† , which
has two Kraus operators,
p
√
K0 = |0ih0| + 1 − γ|1ih1| , K1 = γ|0ih1| ,
(7)

where γ ∈ [0, 1] is the damping parameter. As a test, we
also performed simulations with the depolarizing channel
EDP (ρ) = (1 − )ρ + 3 XρX + 3 Y ρY + 3 ZρZ, which is a
well-studied Pauli channel.
We have also considered two different Pauli approximations of these channels. The Pauli twirl approximation (PTA) to an
P arbitrary channel expressed in the
Pauli basis E(ρ) = i,j χi,j Pi ρPj is the channel E PTA =

4

P

i χi,i Pi ρPi , obtained by removing the off-diagonal elements of χi,j [27, 28]. It can produce noise models that
are much better behaved and thus provide poor insight
into the performance of the real channel. For this reason,
an honest Pauli approximation (HPA) was introduced [6],
which seeks the channel E HPA , which is as close as possible to the original channel yet produces a noisier output
on every possible input. This approximation is thus expected to provide a pessimistic bound on the performance
of a fault-tolerant scheme under some noise process E.
As a first application, we have used the exact simulation algorithm to estimate thresholds, which are presented in Table I. Details on how thresholds were determined are provided in Supplemental Material II. The
largest lattice sizes simulated were 9 × 9 for depolarizing,
11 × 11 for systematic rotation and 9 × 17 for amplitude
damping. For amplitude damping we found that a nonsquare lattice, where the X logical operator runs along
the long dimension of the code, performed significantly
better than a square one.
For the depolarizing channel, we can compare our obtained threshold with exact results. We find that our
threshold estimate agrees with the optimal depolarizing
threshold of 18.9(3)%[29].
The systematic rotation channel was simulated for rotation angles in the range 0.025π ≤ θ ≤ 0.3π. A large region showed below threshold behavior; however, no clear
transition behavior could be identified.
The thresholds of Pauli approximations did not always
agree with the thresholds of the exact channels. However,
the twirl approximation to amplitude damping, yielded
the same threshold as the exact channel (to within the
accuracy of our data). As expected, the honest Pauli approximations provided pessimistic values of the threshold
for non-Pauli channels.
As another application of our algorithm, we have performed exact simulations at fixed noise rates well below threshold. The results are presented in Fig. 2 for
amplitude damping with γ = 9% and z rotation with
θ = 0.005π. Again, the behavior of the twirl approximation agrees quite well with that of the exact amplitude
damping channel. However the behavior of both approximations differed considerably from the exact z rotation.
For instance, for a code with W = 5, the PTA underestimates the logical error rate by a factor of about 1010 ,

= 9%

10 2
Logical error rate

TABLE I: Computed thresholds for three noise models
and their Pauli approximations. PTA and HPA to SR
were computed using the exact value of the threshold
under bit flip noise. Pauli approximations of DP are
identical to the exact channel, so only the exact channel
was simulated.

Amplitude damping

10 1
Logical error rate

Exact
PTA
HPA
DP () 18.5 ± 1.5% 18.5 ± 1.5% 18.5 ± 1.5%
AD (γ)
39 ± 2%
39 ± 2%
21 ± 1%
SR (θ/π)
> 0.15
0.17
0.055

10 2
10 3
10

4
Approx
HPA
PTA
Exact

10 5
10 6
3

5
7
Lattice width W

= 0.005

10 6
Approx
HPA
PTA
Exact

10 10
10 14
10 18
10 22

9

Systematic rotation

3

5
7
9
Lattice width W

11

FIG. 2: Empirical logical error rate vs lattice dimension
for two non-Pauli noise models. Solid black lines
represent exact channels while dashed and dotted lines
represent the PTA and the HPA, respectively. The left
plot is γ = 9% amplitude damping, while the right plot
is θ = 0.005π systematic rotation. For each set of
parameters, 1.32 × 105 syndromes were sampled to
acquire statistics. For the PTA of SR with W > 5, error
rates are numerically zero. Error rates obtained for the
exact channels using an approximate contraction
algorithm with χ = 8 are also plotted in blue. Note that
the exact average logical error could significantly differ
from the empirical average observed over millions of
syndrome measurements if failures are dominated by
outliers.

while the HPA overestimates the logical error rate by a
factor of about 104 . The observed discrepancies highlight
the fact that the performance of the code under an efficiently simulable approximation to a noise model can
differ significantly from its performance under the exact
noise model and motivates the development of more efficient algorithms, such as the one presented here.
We have also computed error rates using the exact
channels but with an approximate contraction algorithm
in place of the (inefficient) exact algorithm. Setting χ = 8
in the calculation of the logical channel, we observe remarkably good agreement with exact data. For instance,
at high noise rates, we obtain the same threshold (within
statistical error) for the amplitude damping channel (see
the threshold plot in Supplemental Material II). We also
observe very good agreement with exact data for systematic rotation and amplitude damping at low logical error
rates, as is displayed in Fig. 2.
Conclusion. — We have presented a simple tensornetwork-based algorithm for simulating the surface code
under arbitrary local noise. The algorithm can be made
exact within statistical fluctuations, allowing accurate
simulation of systems with well over 100 qubits. We
have used exact simulation to estimate thresholds of nonPauli noise models and to calculate error rates well below
threshold.
In order to demonstrate scalability of the simulation,
we have also used an approximate, efficient algorithm to
calculate the logical channel in place of the exact algorithm. We found very good agreement with the exact
data for non-Pauli noise at both high and low logical error rates.

5
While our simulation algorithm has assumed perfect
check measurements, in practice, measurement errors are
unavoidable. In surface-code error correction, measurement errors are detected by performing multiple rounds
of check measurements and observing how the syndrome
evolves in time. This procedure could potentially be sim-

ulated using PEPS time-evolution algorithms [30–33] or
by contracting 3D tensor networks [34].

[1] D. Gottesman, Ph.D. thesis (1997).
[2] M. Gutiérrez, L. Svec, A. Vargo, and K. R. Brown, Phys.
Rev. A 87, 030302 (2013).
[3] J. Wallman, C. Granade, R. Harper, and S. T. Flammia,
New J. Phys. 17, 113020 (2015).
[4] Y. Tomita and K. M. Svore, Phys. Rev. A 90, 062320
(2014).
[5] M. Gutiérrez, C. Smith, L. Lulushi, S. Janardan, and
K. R. Brown, Phys. Rev. A 94, 042338 (2016).
[6] E. Magesan, D. Puzzuoli, C. E. Granade, and D. G.
Cory, Phys. Rev. A 87, 012324 (2013).
[7] N. Schuch, I. Cirac, and D. Pérez-Garcı́a, Ann. Phys.
325, 2153 (2010).
[8] H. Bombin and M. A. Martin-Delgado, Phys. Rev. A 76,
012305 (2007).
[9] N. Schuch, M. M. Wolf, F. Verstraete, and J. I. Cirac,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 98, 140506 (2007).
[10] F. Verstraete and J. I. Cirac, arXiv:cond-mat/0407066
(2004).
[11] M. Levin and C. P. Nave, Phys. Rev. Lett. 99, 120601
(2007).
[12] Z.-C. Gu and X.-G. Wen, Phys. Rev. B 80, 155131
(2009).
[13] M. Lubasch, J. I. Cirac, and M.-C. Bañuls, New J. Phys.
16, 033014 (2014).
[14] G. Evenbly and G. Vidal, Phys. Rev. Lett. 115, 180405
(2015).
[15] S. Yang, Z.-C. Gu, and X.-G. Wen, Phys. Rev. Lett.
118, 110504 (2017).
[16] U. Schollwck, Ann. Phys. 326, 96 (2011).
[17] E. Dennis, A. Kitaev, A. Landahl, and J. Preskill, J.
Math. Phys. 43, 4452 (2002).
[18] J. W. Harrington, Ph.D. thesis (2004).
[19] G. Duclos-Cianci and D. Poulin, Phys. Rev. Lett. 104,
050504 (2010).
[20] J. R. Wootton and D. Loss, Phys. Rev. Lett. 109, 160503
(2012).
[21] S. Bravyi and J. Haah, Phys. Rev. Lett. 111, 200501
(2013).
[22] G. Duclos-Cianci and D. Poulin, Quant. Inf. Comp. 15,
0721 (2014).
[23] A. Hutter, J. R. Wootton, and D. Loss, Phys. Rev. A
89, 022326 (2014).
[24] F. H. E. Watson, H. Anwar, and D. E. Browne, Phys.
Rev. A 92, 032309 (2015).
[25] M. Herold, E. T. Campbell, J. Eisert, and M. J. Kastoryano, npj Quantum Information 1, 15010 (2015).
[26] M. Herold, M. J. Kastoryano, E. T. Campbell, and
J. Eisert, New J. Phys. 19, 063012 (2017).
[27] J. Emerson, M. Silva, O. Moussa, C. Ryan, M. Laforest,
J. Baugh, D. G. Cory, and R. Laflamme, Science 317,
1893 (2007).

[28] C. Dankert, R. Cleve, J. Emerson, and E. Livine, Phys.
Rev. A 80, 012304 (2009).
[29] H. Bombin, R. S. Andrist, M. Ohzeki, H. G. Katzgraber,
and M. A. Martin-Delgado, Phys. Rev. X 2, 021004
(2012).
[30] H. C. Jiang, Z. Y. Weng, and T. Xiang, Phys. Rev. Lett.
101, 090603 (2008).
[31] I. Pižorn, L. Wang, and F. Verstraete, Phys. Rev. A 83,
052321 (2011).
[32] R. Orús, Phys. Rev. B 85, 205117 (2012).
[33] A. Werner, D. Jaschke, P. Silvi, M. Kliesch, T. Calarco,
J. Eisert, and S. Montangero, Phys. Rev. Lett. 116,
237201 (2016).
[34] Z. Y. Xie, J. Chen, M. P. Qin, J. W. Zhu, L. P. Yang,
and T. Xiang, Phys. Rev. B 86, 045139 (2012).

Acknowledgements. — We thank Marcus da Silva for
discussions that initiated this project. This work was
supported by the Army Research Office Contract No.
W911NF-14-C-0048.

1

Supplemental Material

I.

COMPUTING THE LOGICAL CHANNEL AND DECODING

Here we provide more detail on how to compute the logical channel for a round of error correction. Note that, via
the Choi-Jamiolkowski isomorphism, a qubit channel E is completely described by the 4 × 4 process matrix
Cij = Tr([Pi ⊗ Pj ][(E ⊗ I)(|Ψ+ ihΨ+ |)]) ,

(S1)

where Pi for i = 0, 1, 2, 3 are the identity and Pauli X, Y and Z matrices respectively. This represents the state
obtained when the channel is applied to the first qubit of a Bell state |Ψ+ i = |00i + |11i, when expressed in the Pauli
basis. Here we will show how to compute Cij for the logical channel in the case of surface-code error correction, which
will depend on the noise map, the syndrome and the decoder.
The simulated error correction process can be decomposed into three parts
E = Ds ◦ Rs ◦ N ,

(S2)

where N is the physical noise map acting on the N qubits of the code, Rs is the recovery map and Ds is the decoder
correction. The recovery map returns the noisy state to the code space (without performing any classical processing
of the syndrome) and can further be decomposed into Rs (ρ) = Ts Πs ρΠs Ts , where Πs is a projector onto the subspace
corresponding to the syndrome s and Ts is a Pauli operator which returns a state in the image of Πs to the codespace.
We have defined Ts as a product of Paulis that connects the flipped X checks to the top boundary and flipped Z
checks to the left boundary. The decoder correction Ds is the correction selected from {I, X, Y , Z} by the decoding
algorithm to minimise the logical error.
For now, assume that the decoder does nothing so that E = Rs ◦ N . The logical channel E is a map from the
codespace to itself, so it is effectively a single-qubit map. The process matrix describing the transformation of the
logical information given the syndrome s is thus
Cij = Tr([Pi ⊗ Pj ][((Rs ◦ N ) ⊗ I)(|Ψ+ ihΨ+ |)]) ,

(S3)

where |Ψ+ i is a Bell state of the form |Ψ+ i = |0iL |0ia + |1iL |1ia , where the first qubit is encoded into the surface
code and the second qubit is an unencoded ancilla qubit that is assumed to be noise free. Using the cyclic property
of the trace and the fact that Ts Πs = Π0 Ts , where Π0 is the projection onto the code space, we can write the above
expression more explicitly as
Cij = Tr([Ts Pi Ts Πs ⊗ Pj ][(N ⊗ I)(|Ψ+ ihΨ+ |)]) .

(S4)

In the main text we have shown how to represent the Bell state as a tensor network, and how this tensor-network
description changes as local noise N , and syndrome projectors Πs are applied to the state. Using this, the trace over
the physical indices only
Ai = TrL ([Ts Pi Ts Πs ⊗ I][(N ⊗ I)(|Ψ+ ihΨ+ |)])

(S5)

can be represented as a square lattice tensor network, as in 1d), and can be contracted using the method described
in the text. Here TrL indicates that the trace is taken over the physical indices of the logical qubit of |Ψ+ i and the
ancilla qubit is left uncontracted, and untouched by the other operators in the trace. Therefore the expression in Eq.
(S5) has two uncontracted indices (the ancilla indices), i.e. it is a 2 × 2 matrix. We use these free indices to compute
the target quantities Cij in (S4) via Cij = Tr(Pj Ai ).
Computing Cij in this way would seem to require computing four full square lattice tensor contractions: one for
each Ai , i.e. each row of Cij . However, as explained in Sec. III a lot of the intermediate contractions can be reused for
different i, allowing the full matrix Cij to be computed using only two full lattice contractions. The overall complexity
of this calculation is O(LW 4W ) if performed exactly, or O(LW χ3 ) using the approximate algorithm. Having computed
the effective logical channel Rs ◦ N , a decoder correction Ds can be incorporated simply by composing the logical
channel with the chosen Pauli operator.
Here we have shown how to compute the logical channel for a given syndrome and noise model. In the following
section we will describe a decoding algorithm based on the above calculations.

2
A.

Exact decoding

In the previous section we showed how to compute the logical channel E for a given noise model and syndrome.
This same calculation allows us to perform exact decoding i.e. to select a optimal correction for a given syndrome.
Assume that we are given a syndrome s and a noise model N . We can compute Rs ◦ N using the method described
above. Then computing the optimal correction simply amounts to choosing the Ds from {I, X, Y, Z} that minimises
the distance of the effective channel from the identity
d(Ds ◦ Rs ◦ N , I) ,

(S6)

where d can be any distance between operators e.g. diamond distance, fidelity, or 2-norm distance. In this work we
used the 2-norm distance due to its easy computability. If Rs ◦ N is calculated exactly, this decoding algorithm is
optimal, in the sense that it exactly chooses the correction that minimises the distance of the logical channel from the
identity. It involves the exact calculation of Rs ◦N and is therefore exponential, as described above. However, if Rs ◦N
is already calculated, the remaining calculations involve manipulations of small matrices and take constant time. Thus
choosing an optimal correction requires negligible extra work compared to exactly simulating error correction, and
therefore we have used this above optimal decoding in all of our exact simulations. When the approximate contraction
algorithm is used, the decoder functions almost identically, except that it uses an approximation of Rs ◦ N , rather
than the exact channel. In this case, due to possible errors in the approximation, the decoding is not guaranteed
to be optimal. However it would be interesting to see whether such a decoding algorithm is sufficiently accurate for
practical purposes.

II.

COMPUTING THE ERROR THRESHOLD

In Fig. S1 we include plots obtained from our simulation data. The simulations were run for depolarizing, amplitude
damping, and systematic rotation noise models and the lattice dimensions and the noise strength were varied. For
each data point, a large number of samples (between 1.3 × 104 and 1.3 × 105 ) were obtained. We have used the
decoding algorithm described in the previous section. A threshold was identified as the point below which increasing
the lattice size resulted in a decrease in the logical error rate. For amplitude damping we have also plotted data
obtained using an approximate contraction algorithm to compute the logical channel for the largest two lattice sizes.

0.5
0.4
0.16

0.17

0.18

0.19

Depolarising strength p

0.20

Amplitude damping threshold

0.70
0.65

7x13 approx
9x17 approx
3x5
5x9
7x13
9x17

0.60
0.55
0.50
0.37

0.38

z-rotation threshold

Logical error rate

0.6

0.75

Logical error rate

Logical error rate

Depolarising threshold

3x3
5x5
7x7
9x9

0.39

Damping rate

0.40

0.41

1.0
0.8

3x3
5x5
7x7
9x9
11x11

0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0

0.05

0.10

0.15

0.20

Rotation angle /

0.25

0.30

FIG. S1: Logical error rate (defined as the diamond distance of the logical channel from the identity) vs. noise
strength for various noise models and lattice sizes.
For depolarizing and amplitude damping, the thresholds are clear from the graphs and are listed in Table I. We
remark that, for amplitude damping, the crossing point for the approximate data is identical to that obtained using
exact data. On the other hand, the z-rotation did not have a clear threshold. The plot is symmetric about the point
θ = 0.25π, where the code performs most poorly. Increasing the lattice size appeared to decrease the logical error rate
for a large range of θ, however at certain points the error suppression (e.g. between 0.15π and 0.225π) was minimal.
Therefore we could not confidently pin-down a threshold for systematic rotation.

III.

OPTIMIZATIONS

A number of optimizations were required for our exact algorithm to handle the code sizes studied in this work. In
this section, we will briefly describe the main optimizations used.

3

(a)

(b)

FIG. S2: a) Distance-5 surface code layout with qubits on the vertices of a rectangular lattice. Orange faces indicate
x-checks, while white faces indicate z-checks. b) A tensor network representing an encoded |0iL state on this layout.
Each box is a Q+ tensor, which is applied either to a physical |0i state or to the output leg of another Q+ tensor.
We have coloured the bottom layer of checks red and the top layer black to make them easier to distinguish. Virtual
indices all lie in the plane of the page, and physical indices are perpendicular to it. The bond layout is optimised for
the exact contraction scheme we have used.

Reducing the inter-column bond dimension — Recall that the exact tensor contraction algorithm we use is exponential,
which results from the fact that amount of memory required to store the tensor associated to a column is exponential
in the number of inter-column bonds. Every check projector that is applied in the algorithm adds bonds to the
tensor network. Therefore we can obtain substantial savings if we can reduce the number of check projectors that are
applied. In certain calculations, we do not need to apply all of the checks that we might naively expect. For instance,
when computing the logical channel E as detailed in Sec. I, we need to apply the recovery map Rs to the state.
The definition of Rs involves two layers of checks Πs , one to the left and one to the right of the input. However, by
making use of the cyclic property of the trace, one of the projectors can be absorbed into the other thereby reducing
the number of bonds in the network.
Also, when simulating z-rotation, only x-checks ever need to be applied. The z-checks commute with the noise,
and therefore act as the identity on any state in the code space. This is why it was possible to simulate larger codes
for z-rotation compared with other noise models.
Finally, we can reduce the number of inter-column bonds substantially by exploiting the invariance of the checkprojector tensors in Eq. (3) under permutation of the particles, and always orienting the three bonds of the check
such that there is only one inter-column bond per check. This optimised layout is illustrated for the |0iL state in
Fig. S2b).
Reusing tensor contractions — In many cases, when computing the contraction of the square lattice tensor network,
the entire network does not need to be contracted. When sampling syndrome measurements, for instance, a check
measurement does not affect the tensors in columns to the left and right of the check. The contractions in these
unaffected regions can therefore be reused for every check measurement in a column. Similar savings can be obtained
when computing different elements of the logical channel process matrix Cij , since the application of a logical Z only
affects a single column of the tensor network.
Optimized layout — We have used an optimized surface-code layout which was introduced in [S8]. This layout
achieves a given code distance with fewer physical qubits than the standard layout. It consists of four-qubit x and z
checks arranged in a checkerboard pattern, as well as a number of two-qubit checks along the boundaries. We have
illustrated this layout in Fig. S2a).

