Fault-Tolerant Operation of a Quantum
Error-Correction Code
Laird Egan1,† , Dripto M. Debroy2 , Crystal Noel1 , Andrew Risinger1 , Daiwei Zhu1 ,
Debopriyo Biswas1 , Michael Newman3,* , Muyuan Li5 , Kenneth R. Brown2,3,4,5 , Marko
Cetina1,2 , and Christopher Monroe1

arXiv:2009.11482v2 [quant-ph] 7 Jan 2021

1 Joint Quantum Institute, Center for Quantum Information and Computer Science, and Departments of Physics and

Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Maryland, College Park, MD 20742
2 Department of Physics, Duke University, Durham, NC 27708
3 Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Duke University, Durham, NC 27708
4 Department of Chemistry, Duke University, Durham, NC 27708
5 Schools of Chemistry and Biochemistry and Computational Science and Engineering, Georgia Institute of
Technology, Atlanta, GA, 30332
* Present Address: Google Research, Venice, CA 90291
† Email: laird.egan@gmail.com

ABSTRACT
Quantum error correction protects fragile quantum information by encoding it into a larger quantum system. These
extra degrees of freedom enable the detection and correction of errors, but also increase the operational complexity
of the encoded logical qubit. Fault-tolerant circuits contain the spread of errors while operating the logical qubit,
and are essential for realizing error suppression in practice. While fault-tolerant design works in principle, it has not
previously been demonstrated in an error-corrected physical system with native noise characteristics. In this work,
we experimentally demonstrate fault-tolerant preparation, measurement, rotation, and stabilizer measurement of a
Bacon-Shor logical qubit using 13 trapped ion qubits. When we compare these fault-tolerant protocols to non-fault
tolerant protocols, we see significant reductions in the error rates of the logical primitives in the presence of noise.
The result of fault-tolerant design is an average state preparation and measurement error of 0.6% and a Clifford gate
error of 0.3% after error correction. Additionally, we prepare magic states with fidelities exceeding the distillation
threshold, demonstrating all of the key single-qubit ingredients required for universal fault-tolerant operation. These
results demonstrate that fault-tolerant circuits enable highly accurate logical primitives in current quantum systems.
With improved two-qubit gates and the use of intermediate measurements, a stabilized logical qubit can be achieved.

errors, but the encoding procedure was not fault-tolerant24
and the system was not large enough to measure the error
syndromes non-destructively using ancilla25, 26 . Parallel work
on bosonic codes has demonstrated encoded operations27, 28 ,
fault-tolerant detection, one-axis29 , and two-axis30 error correction on encoded qubits. For both qubit codes and bosonic
codes, fault-tolerant state preparation of a code capable of
correcting all single-qubit errors has not been achieved.
Here, we present the fully fault-tolerant operation of a
quantum error-correcting code. We demonstrate all of the
primitives required for FT operation of the encoded qubit: FT
preparation, FT measurement, FT logical gates, and FT stabilizer measurement. Unlike previous works, this code protects
against any single circuit fault (along any axis and without
postselection), realizing quadratic error suppression in principle. In practice, this error suppression requires high-fidelity
components and localized errors to take effect. Remarkably,
we observe a logical operation, preparation and measurement
in the Z-basis that exceeds the performance of its physical
counterpart. More generally, we realize high-accuracy logical
primitives that outperform the limiting physical operation used
in their construction, namely our native two-qubit entangling
gate.
To experimentally verify the properties of fault-tolerance,

Quantum computers promise to solve models of important
physical processes, optimize complex cost functions, and
challenge cryptography in ways that are intractable using
current computers1–5 . However, realistic quantum component
failure rates are typically too high to achieve these goals6, 7 .
These applications will therefore likely require quantum error
correction schemes to significantly suppress errors8, 9 .
Quantum error correcting codes combine multiple physical qubits into logical qubits that robustly store information
within an entangled state10–12 . However, these codes are not
enough on their own. Fault-tolerant (FT) operations, which
limit the ways in which errors can spread throughout the
system, must also be used. Without them, the logical error
rate may be limited by faults at critical circuit locations that
cascade into logical failures, negating the advantage of errorcorrection.
FT state preparation, detection, and operations have been
demonstrated using quantum error detecting codes with four
data qubits13–17 . These codes can identify when errors have
occurred, but do not extract enough information to correct
them. There have also been quantum demonstrations of classical repetition codes to correct quantum errors restricted along
one axis 18–23 . In other work, qubits have been encoded into
quantum error correcting codes that can correct all single qubit
1

0

1

1

2
3
12

3

4

4

10

5

5
11

6

6

7

7
8
9
14

Ion Chain

6

13

10

1

2

3

4

5

6
6

7

8

9

12

2

8
9

11

Encoder

Logical Qubit

13

Logical
Operations

Figure 1. The Bacon-Shor subsystem code implemented on a 15 ion chain. Bacon-Shor is a [[9,1,3]] subsystem code that encodes 9 data
qubits into 1 logical qubit. Four weight-6 stabilizers are mapped to ancillary qubits 10, 11, 12, and 13, for measuring errors in the X and Z
basis. We demonstrate encoding of the logical qubit, with subsequent logical gate operations or error syndrome extraction.

we compare non-fault-tolerant (nFT) preparation, nFT logical
gates, and nFT stabilizer measurement to their FT counterparts
and observe the reduced suppression of errors. In the process,
we generate high-fidelity encoded magic states above the
distillation threshold, which are a critical resource for certain
universal FT quantum computing architectures31 .
We achieve these results by matching a versatile quantum
error-correcting code to the unique capabilities of a state-ofthe-art ion trap quantum computer. The ion trap system is
simultaneously large enough to run fault-tolerant primitives
– which require more qubits than the error-correction codes
themselves – while remaining accurate enough to realize highfidelity encoded operations. We leverage the all-to-all connectivity of the device to implement a subsystem quantum
error-correction code that does not require intermediate measurement to achieve fault-tolerance. This allows us to study
simple primitives in error-correction codes, even without repeated stabilization required for long-lived memories.
The quantum computer used in this work consists of lasercooled 171 Yb+ ions trapped above a microfabricated chip32 in
a room-temperature vacuum chamber. Each physical qubit is
encoded in the 2 S1/2 electronic ground state hyperfine “clock”
states of a single 171 Yb+ ion, |0i ≡ |F = 0; mF = 0i, |1i ≡
|F = 1; mF = 0i, with a qubit frequency splitting of ω0 =
2π × 12.642820424(4) GHz. The qubits have a measured T2
decoherence time in excess of 2.75 s (limited by the stability
of external magnetic fields) and average single-shot detection
fidelity of > 99.5%. Quantum gates are driven by individually
optically addressing up to 32 equispaced ions in a single
chain via a multi-channel acousto-optic modulator (AOM)33 .
We implement high-fidelity native single-qubit and two-qubit
gates with fidelities of 99.98% and 98.5-99.3%, respectively.
All-to-all two-qubit gate connectivity is achieved through
coupling of ions via a shared motional bus34 . Details of the
system, characterization, and benchmarking are available in
the Methods and Supplementary Information.
As shown in Fig. 1, we implement a [[9,1,3]] Bacon-Shor

code35, 36 . Because it has distance 3, the code is able to correct
any single-qubit error. This code is well-suited to near-term
ion-trap quantum computing architectures for two reasons.
First, Bacon-Shor codes can be prepared fault-tolerantly without intermediate measurement. Compared with the typical
projective preparation of topological codes, unitary preparation requires fewer gates and less ancillary qubits. This allows
us to demonstrate FT primitives with fewer resources and
without intermediate measurements. Second, this code choice
is a reasonable midpoint between the qubit efficiency of the 7qubit Steane code and the robustness of the Surface-17 code37 .
Although the Bacon-Shor stabilizers are weight-6 and nonlocal, they can be fault-tolerantly measured using only one
ancilla per stabilizer38 and leverage the all-to-all connectivity
in the device.
As a subsystem code, the Bacon-Shor code is a generalization of Shor’s code that has 4 additional degrees of freedom
known as gauge qubits11 . For particular choices of gauge, its
logical states are products of GHZ states:
1
|0/1iL ⊗ |XiG = √ (| + ++i ± | − −−i)⊗3 ,
2 2
(1)
1
| + /−iL ⊗ |ZiG = √ (|000i ± |111i)⊗3 ,
2 2
√
where |±i = (|0i ± |1i)/ 2 and |X/ZiG refer to different
states of the gauge qubits (see Supplementary Information).
Bacon-Shor codes support a wide range of FT operations,
including state preparation, state measurement, gates, and
stabilizer measurement. Fault-tolerance, as a design principle, ensures faults on physical operations do not propagate
to uncorrectable multi-qubit failures in the circuit. As seen
in Eq. 1, not all Bacon-Shor logical states require global entanglement. It is precisely this decomposition into decoupled
GHZ states that allows Bacon-Shor to be prepared unitarily
and fault-tolerantly. In the ZL /XL basis, the logical information is encoded redundantly into the relative phase of each
state. While a single circuit fault may corrupt one of the three
2/23

GHZ states, the information can be recovered from the other
two.
FT measurement (in the X/Z basis) is performed by individually measuring the data qubits (in the X/Z basis). From this
information, one can recover relevant stabilizer outcomes as
correlations among the single data-qubit outcomes. This postprocessed information is then combined with any previously
extracted syndromes, and then collectively decoded to produce a correction. It is worth emphasizing that, although our
system does not currently support intermediate measurements,
this post-processing step does not differ from the final step of
a logical qubit memory experiment with multiple rounds of
intermediate measurements.
Fault-tolerance in logical gates is often achieved via
transversal gates, which are physical operations that act independently on each qubit in a code block. Bacon-Shor
codes have transversal constructions, when allowing permutations, for {CNOTL , HL , YL (π/2) , XL }39–41 . Here, Y (θ ) indicates exponentiation of the Pauli-Ȳ matrix, e−iθ Ȳ /2 . FT
non-Clifford logical gates, which are required for universality,
can be achieved through magic state distillation31 .
Finally, measuring error syndromes requires interacting ancillae with multiple data qubits, which could cause damaging
correlated errors. However, fault-tolerance is achieved by carefully ordering the interactions, so that correlated errors can be
reduced to low-weight errors up to a benign transformation of
the gauge subsystem38, 42 .

Encoding the Logical Qubit
We embed the 9 data qubits and 4 ancilla qubits of the BaconShor-13 code in a single chain of 15 ions (Fig. 1), with the
two end ions left idle to obtain uniform spacing of the central
13 ions. The mapping of the code onto the chain is chosen to
minimize two-qubit gate crosstalk (details in Supplementary
Information). At the start of each experiment, the qubits
are initialized to the |0i state. A given circuit is executed
by sending appropriate signals to the AOM that implement
single and two-qubit gates on the ion chain with all-to-all
connectivity33, 34 . At the end of a circuit, we perform global
state readout by simultaneously collecting state-dependent
fluorescence from each ion using high-resolution optics and
32 individual photo-multiplier tubes.
The encoding circuit used to create logical states is shown
in Fig. 2(a). The right sub-circuit (blue) is FT because there
are no entangling operations between independent GHZ states
that would allow errors to propagate; however it is limited to
preparation of only Z and X basis states. One may prepend an
optional sub-circuit (red, dashed) that enables the encoding
of arbitrary |ψiL states, controlled by a single physical qubit
state |ψi. This circuit can produce global entanglement, and
allows the possibility of early errors spreading between the
separate GHZ states. As a consequence, this circuit loses
the FT properties of the X and Z basis preparation circuits.
To directly investigate the properties of fault-tolerance, we

compare the encoding performance of the right FT sub-circuit
to the full nFT circuit with |ψi ∈ {|0i, |1i, |+i, |−i}.
After measuring the data qubits, the logical measurement
outcome is determined by calculating the total parity of all the
data qubits in the Z-basis, ZL = Z1 Z2 ...Z8 Z9 . From Eq.1, the
|0iL state has even parity (hZiL = 1) while |1iL has odd parity
(hZiL = −1). Similarly, the | + /−iL states have even/odd
parity in the XL basis; a YL (−π/2) operation following the encoding circuit, maps hXiL → hZiL . The measured raw parity
compared to the ideal parity of each logical Z, X basis state
is presented in Fig. 2(b). In addition to the total raw parity,
ZL , the data qubit measurements also provide the eigenvalues
of the two stabilizers in the measurement basis. With this
information, error correction can be applied, which yields
an expected quadratic suppression of uncorrelated errors (i.e.
corrects any single error). Alternatively, error detection is
performed by post-selecting experimental shots conditioned
on the +1-eigenvalues of the stabilizers. This will yield an
expected cubic suppression of uncorrelated errors (i.e. detects
any pair of errors). Further details of these protocols are given
in the Methods.
As shown in Fig. 2(b), using the FT circuit (blue) and performing error correction, we prepare |0iL , |1iL , |+iL , and |−iL
states with respective errors 0.21(4)%, 0.39(5)%, 0.71(7)%,
and 1.04(9)%. We note that the average state preparation and measurement error for a single physical qubit in
the Z basis is 0.46(2)% (Supplementary Information) compared to 0.30(3)% in the logical qubit. This is one context
in which the logical qubit clearly outperforms our physical qubit. For the nFT circuit (red) the respective errors
are 0.93(8)%, 1.05(9)%, 3.7(2)%, and 3.8(2)%. The errordetection experiment presents particularly strong evidence for
fault-tolerance. We observe a remarkable gap in the failures
between the nFT and FT protocols: averaged over the basis
states, we see 2 failures of FT error-detection over 13,288
post-selected shots, compared with 197 failures over 12,105
post-selected shots when using nFT error-detection. This
agrees with a local error model where we expect cubic suppression of FT error-detection, in stark contrast with nFT
error-detection, which can fail due to a single circuit fault.
The observed two orders-of-magnitude difference lends further evidence that these circuits, which are fault-tolerant in
principle, are also fault-tolerant in practice.
The nFT preparation circuit can also be used to create
|Hx iL = e−iπȲ /8 |0iL and |Hy iL = e−iπ X̄/8 |0iL magic states,
which can be distilled to implement FT non-Clifford gates31, 43 .
Fig. 2(c) depicts these states on the logical Bloch sphere, and
the results are shown in Fig. 2(d). After error correction, the
calculated |Hx iL encoding fidelity is 97(1)% (analysis in the
Supplementary Information), which is above the distillation
threshold of 92.4%43 .
Performance of the logical qubit as a quantum memory can
be characterized by measuring the coherence of |+iL versus
time. The results of this logical T2∗ experiment are presented
in Fig. 2(e). For the raw, error correction, and error detection
3/23

a

nFT

Fault-Tolerant

b

1

2
3
4

5
6

7

8
9

c

d

e

FT Raw
FT Correction
FT Detection

Figure 2. Fault-tolerant logical qubit state preparation. a, Encoding circuit for creating logical qubit states. The right subcircuit (blue) is
used for FT preparation of Z-logical basis states. X-logical basis states can be created by omitting the final Hadamard gates. The left
subcircuit (red, dashed) can be optionally prepended for nFT preparation of arbitrary logical states. b, Errors for the key basis states of the
encoded logical qubit. The measured expectation value of the parity (Pmeas = hZ/XiL ) is compared against the ideal parity of the logical state
(Pideal = ±1). Error bars indicate the 95% binomial proportion confidence interval. c, Magic states |Hx iL and |Hy iL are directly encoded
using the full nFT circuit from a (red arrows). Subsequent YL (π/2) rotations (blue arrows) are used to bound the fidelity. d, Experimental
hZiL values for the states depicted in c. 95% binomial proportion confidence intervals are smaller than the data points e, Logical qubit
coherence measured for the |+iL state. After each wait time, a varying Z(φ ) gate is applied to every data qubit, followed by YL (−π/2). A fit
of hXiL depending on φ to a Ramsey fringe yields the Ramsey amplitude (A). Error bars are the 95% confidence intervals from maximum
∗
likelihood estimation fits.The resulting contrast as a function of time is fit to a decaying exponential Ae−t/T2 for the raw, corrected, and
detected data.

decoding schemes, we measure a T2∗ of 27(2) ms, 78(9) ms,
and 300(90) ms. The measured T2∗ of each independent GHZ
state in the logical qubit is almost entirely explained by the
measured T2∗ = 0.6(1) s of the individual physical qubits (see
Supplementary Information). Future work that utilizes the
gauge degrees of freedom to create decoherence-free subspaces44, 45 within the |+iL GHZ states should readily extend
the logical T2∗ to the physical T2∗ . Ultimately, repeated stabilization of the logical qubit over intermediate time scales will
be required to achieve a robust quantum memory.

Logical Gates
We implement a YL (θ ) rotation on the encoded qubit, which
can only be performed transversally for a discrete set of angles46 . In the case of Bacon-Shor, the smallest transversal
YL (θ ) rotation we can create is YL (π/2), which is generated
by applying a physical Y (π/2) to each data qubit, followed
by relabeling the data qubit indices in post-processing (blue,

Fig. 3a,c). We compare the performance of this FT rotation
with a nFT circuit which implements YL (θ ) = Y1 Z2 Z3 X4 X7 (θ )
(red, Fig. 3a,b). In a perfect system, these rotations are equivalent for θ = Nπ/2, N ∈ Z on the logical qubit, but differ in
their operation on the gauge qubits. The nFT gate (Fig. 3b)
generates entanglement among the separate GHZ states, and
so the failure of a single operation in the circuit can lead to
the failure of the logical qubit.
The results of these different gate operations on the logical qubit are shown in Fig. 3d-e. The gate error per π/2
angle, corresponding to fit parameter Γ, is 0.3(1)% for the FT
gate after error-correction. This error rate explains the additional error present for the | + /−iL states in Fig. 2b, which
require two additional YL (π/2) gates for state preparation and
measurement. The rest of the fit values are tabulated in the
Supplementary Information. The error at θ = π, the maximum gate angle required with optimized circuit compilation,
is shown in Fig. 3e. The error for the FT gates and nFT continuous rotations is 0.33(18)% and 6.4(1.6)%, respectively,
4/23

a

a

1

2

1

2

4

5

4

5

11
7

8

11
7

error
on ancilla 12

e

b

c

b

d

FT Raw
nFT Raw
FT Correction
nFT Correction

Figure 3. Manipulating logical states. a, A schematic depicting
different logical operations. A FT discrete logical rotation (blue)
operating on |0iL is a transversal operation, YL (π/2) = Y (π/2)⊗9 ,
that leaves the code subspace (gray planes) and returns via a
permutation of qubit labeling (U perm ). A nFT continuous logical
rotation (red) operating on |0iL is a 5-qubit entangling operation,
YL (θ ) = Y1 Z2 Z3 X4 X7 (θ ), that rotates through the code subspace. At
θ = π/2, these gates are equivalent up to a gauge transformation. b,
The circuit for the nFT gate capable of creating any state along the
red curve. c, The circuit for the FT gate shown by the blue curve. d,
Experimental results comparing FT (blue) and nFT (red) logical
operations. The expectation value of the logical Z operator is fit to a
π
decaying sinusoid hZiL = A cos(θ )e−Γθ / 2 . e, Detailed view at
θ = π. The error bars in d/e are 95% confidence intervals from the
binomial distribution.

after error correction. Compared to the FT circuit, error correction on the nFT rotation provides minimal gains, indicative
of a high proportion of weight-2 errors relative to weight-1
errors. In contrast, hZiL recovers quite significantly after error

Raw

8

Baseline
nFT
FT

Correction
Baseline
nFT
FT

10

12

11

13

Figure 4. Detection of arbitrary single-qubit errors. a
Expectation value of the logical Z operator after encoding |0iL
(Baseline, grey/black line), and then performing the nFT (red) or FT
measurement (blue) of a single X-type stabilizer with a Z(θ ) error
inserted on the ancilla during measurement. b After encoding |0iL ,
different Pauli errors are purposely introduced on a selected data
qubit in the code. To detect the error, each stabilizer eigenvalue is
mapped onto the state of the corresponding ancilla qubit. The ideal
ancilla population is 0/1 depending on whether an error did not/did
anticommute with the stabilizer block. The colored bars correspond
to the measured population of the different ancilla qubits. The error
bars in a,b indicate the 95% binomial proportion confidence interval.
The circuits used to generate the data shown in this figure are given
in Extended Data Figure 1.

detection, indicating that there are still few weight-3 or higher
errors in the system. This is a striking example of the value
of fault-tolerance, which minimizes the impact of correlated
weight-2 errors on the logical qubit.

Stabilizer Measurements
In stabilizer measurements, fault-tolerance is achieved by
a specific ordering of the interactions between the ancilla
and the stabilizer block 38 . We insert a variable Z(θ ) error
on the ancilla during the measurement of a single stabilizer
(X1 X2 X4 X5 X7 X8 ) and compare the impact of this error in a FT
ordering and a nFT ordering. Without correction, a Z error on
the ancilla qubit will propagate to an X error on the data qubit
and flip hZiL .
The results of this experiment are shown in Fig. 4a. At the
5/23

extreme case of θ = π, the raw parity is nearly identical in the
two cases, but after correction, the FT stabilizer measurement
recovers the correct logical parity whereas the nFT stabilizer
measurement induces a logical fault. This is because the FT
gate ordering propagates a correlated error that decomposes
as the product of (at worst) a single qubit fault and a benign
transformation of the gauge subsystem. By comparison, the
nFT gate ordering propagates a correlated error that directly
corrupts the logical subsystem.
At θ = 0, (i.e., when no error is added) the error-corrected
error rates for |0iL after the nFT and FT stabilizer measurement are 0.76(22)% and 0.20(13)%, respectively, compared
to a baseline encoding error of 0.23(13)%. To within statistical error, there is no distinction between performing the FT
stabilizer measurement or not, providing strong evidence that
this procedure does not corrupt the logical qubit state beyond
the error-handling capabilities of the code. On the other hand,
there is a statistically significant difference (p-value < 0.015)
between the nFT and FT ordering. This again demonstrates
the value of fault-tolerance in an apples-to-apples comparison:
in two circuits of identical complexity, performing the circuit
fault-tolerantly yields an average 4-times reduction in error.
The fact that this reduction is not larger speaks to the precise
phase control in our system. While this experiment is specific
to X errors propagated from the X-stabilizer ancilla qubit, we
also characterize Z errors with a similar experiment on the
|+iL state (Supplementary Information).
In Fig. 4b we show the results of directly measuring the
full set of stabilizers with four additional ancilla qubits. First,
the state is fault-tolerantly encoded into the |0iL state. Then,
an artificial error is applied to a data qubit. Finally, the full set
of stabilizers, in sequential order X and then Z, are mapped
to the ancilla qubits in a single shot. If no error has occurred,
all four stabilizers commute with the logical qubit state and
the ancilla qubits should remain in the |0i state. Conversely,
if an error did occur on a data qubit, the stabilizers that do not
commute with that error flip the state of the ancilla to |1i. For
example, a Pauli Y error on data qubit 1 anticommutes with
both the X and Z stabilizers that measure it, resulting in a flip
of ancilla qubits 10 and 12, as we observe in the data. This
confirms our ability to, on average, simultaneously identify
arbitrary single qubit errors along both X and Z axes using the
stabilizer outcomes.
The data presented in Fig. 4b represents a sample of selected errors; the full data set is available in Supplementary
Information. Averaged over all the injected errors, the measured ancilla qubits 12, 13, 10, and 11 (in order of measurement) differ from the expected value by 17.9(3)%, 24.8(3)%,
24.4(3)%, and 29.8(6)%, respectively. Most of this nonartificial error is induced by the syndrome extraction circuit
itself. In particular, these results are well explained by the
3.8(2)% raw |0iL encoding error, 6.9(5)% error per X stabilizer, 6.4(7)% error per Z stabilizer, and a fixed 7.2(5)%
Z-type error on the logical qubit that is consistent with the
expected raw T2∗ -decay over the 3 ms time required to mea-

sure X stabilizers, as shown in Fig. 2(c). While these circuits
are remarkably accurate given their complexity (30 two-qubit
gates in total), we expect that further refinements in gate fidelity are necessary to see improvements over multiple rounds
of stabilization.

Outlook
In this work, we have demonstrated high-accuracy faulttolerant operation of a logical qubit capable of correcting all
single-qubit errors. There are two clear and immediate milestones ahead. One is to demonstrate a transversal CNOT logical gate that outperforms the physical two-qubit gate, which is
the limiting operation in ion systems. This experiment should
be possible in the current system given that two-qubit gates
on 23 data qubits have recently been demonstrated 47 . The
other is to stabilize the state over multiple rounds of errorcorrection, which can be achieved by breaking the ion chain
to perform mid-circuit detection48 . This shuttling will likely
require sympathetic cooling schemes, which have been previously demonstrated49, 50 and can also be readily implemented
in this system47 .

Data Availability
The data that support the findings of this study are available
from the corresponding author upon request and with the
permission of the US Government sponsors who funded the
work.

Code Availability
The code used for the analyses is available from the corresponding author upon request and with the permission of the
US Government sponsors who funded the work.

Acknowledgments
We acknowledge fruitful discussions with N. M. Linke and
the contributions of J. Mizrahi, K. Hudek, J. Amini, K. Beck,
and M. Goldman to the experimental setup. This work is
supported by the ARO through the IARPA LogiQ program,
the NSF STAQ Program, the AFOSR MURIs on Dissipation
Engineering in Open Quantum Systems and Quantum Interactive Protocols for Quantum Computation, and the ARO MURI
on Modular Quantum Circuits. L. Egan and D. M. Debroy are
also funded by NSF award DMR-1747426.

Author Contributions
L.E. collected and analyzed the data. L.E., D.M.D., C.N.,
and M.N., wrote the manuscript and designed figures. M.C.
and C.M. led construction of the experimental apparatus with
contributions from L.E., C.N., A.R., D.Z., and D.B. Theory
support was provided by D.M.D., M.N., M.L., and K.R.B..
C.M. and K.R.B. supervised the project. All authors discussed
results and contributed to the manuscript.
6/23

Methods
Experimental implementation
We trap 171 Yb+ in a microfabricated-chip ion trap (High Optical Access 2.1.1 from Sandia National Labs) driven by an
RF voltage at a frequency of 36.06 MHz. We define the x-axis
along the trap axis, with the z-axis perpendicular to the chip
surface. A magnetic field of 5.183 G along the z-axis defines
the atomic quantization axis. The individually-addressing
(global) Raman beam is oriented along the z(y)-axis of the
trap, so that the Raman process transfers momentum to the
ions along the ŷ − ẑ direction. We selectively couple light
to the lower-frequency set of radial modes by tilting the trap
principal axes using a static electric yz quadrupole. We use
quadratic and quartic axial potentials to minimize the spacing
inhomogeneity for the middle N-2 ions. In the 15-ion chain,
the longest wavelength (in-phase) mode along each trap axis
is (νx , νy−z , νy+z ) = (0.193, 3.077, 3.234) MHz.
An imaging objective with numerical aperture 0.63 (Photon
Gear, Inc.) is used to focus each of the 32 individual beams
to a waist of 0.85 µm, spaced by 4.43 µm at the ions. The
mode-locked 355 nm laser (Coherent Paladin 355-4000) used
to drive Raman transitions has been modified to tune the
repetition rate of the laser so as to null the 4-photon crossbeam Stark shift. Typical spin-flip Rabi frequencies achieved
in our system are 500 kHz. The maximum crosstalk on nearby
ions is 2.5% of the Rabi frequency of the addressed ion.
Before each experiment, the ions are cooled to near the
motional ground state through a combination of Doppler cooling and Raman sideband cooling and then initialized into
|0i via optical pumping. After the circuit, resonant 369 nm
light on the 2 S1/2 →2 P1/2 cycling transition is used to perform state detection. Scattered light is collected through the
0.63 NA objective and imaged with magnification of 28 onto
a multi-mode (100 µm core) fiber array that is broken out
into individual photo-multiplier tubes (Hamamatsu H10682).
About 1% of the total light is detected as counts. Dark/bright
states are mapped to |0i/|1i states by setting a threshold at
> 1 photon detected within a detection window (typically
100 µs). State preparation and detection errors are 0.22(2)%
and 0.71(4)% for |0i and |1i. Detection crosstalk onto neighboring channels is 0.3(2)%; see Supplementary Information
for detailed error budget.
The entire experiment is controlled by an FPGA (Xilinx)
programmed via the ARTIQ software. RF gate waveforms are
generated by a 4-channel AWG (Keysight M3202A), one of
which drives the global beam, and two of which are routed
through a custom switch network onto any of the 15 middle
channels of the individual beam AOM at each timestep in the
circuit.
Native ion-trap single-qubit gates
The native physical single-qubit gate available to our system is
a single qubit rotation about a vector in the xy-plane, R(θ , φ )
where θ is the angle of rotation and φ is the angle between the
rotation axis and the x-axis. In this notation, RX(θ ) = R(θ , 0)

and RY (θ ) = R(θ , π/2). Additionally, we use compound SK1
pulses to suppress angle and cross-talk errors51 . The SK1
pulses are shaped with a smooth Gaussian amplitude envelope
to avoid frequency content that may excite axial motion due
to light-induced prompt charge effects from partially exposed
semiconductor in the chip trap. Due to hardware limitations,
single-qubits gates are run sequentially. We implement virtual
RZ(θ ) gates via a software advance of the local oscillator
phase, tracked for each individual ion. Before each circuit is
run, we calibrate the amplitude of an RX(θ ) on each qubit in
the chain. We achieve single-qubit native gate error rates of
1.8(3) × 10−4 on a 15-ion chain as measured by randomized
benchmarking (see Supplementary Information).
Native ion-trap two-qubit gates
The native two-qubit operation is the XX(θ ) Ising gate, implemented via a Mølmer-Sørensen interaction52 . CNOT gates can
be constructed from an XX(π/4) gate and additional single
qubit gates53 . Offline, we calculate laser pulse solutions for
XX gates to disentangle the motional modes using amplitudemodulated waveforms33 discretized into 16 segments with
linear interpolation between segments to avoid undesirable excitation of the axial motion. In an equispaced chain of 15 ions,
we observe that the middle 11 radial motional modes are also
roughly equispaced. The laser detuning from motional modes
is constant across the waveform and is chosen to sit approximately halfway between two adjacent modes, which leads to
particularly simple laser waveforms to eliminate qubit-motion
entanglement at the end of the gate. The gate frequency for
a particular gate pair is optimized to minimize the required
laser power, minimize sensitivity to mode-frequency errors
of < 1 kHz, and to avoid coupling to modes with low spatial
frequencies that are subject to heating . Gate durations are
225 µs. To avoid unwanted couplings, we run two-qubit gates
sequentially. Before a batch of circuits is run, we calibrate the
amplitude, common phase and differential phase of each gate
in the circuit. We achieve between 98.5 and 99.3% fidelity on
a typical gate, measured by parity fringes after a varying odd
number of successive non-echoed or echoed XX gates (see
Supplementary Information).
Crosstalk Detection
When available, unused qubits in a circuit are used as flag
qubits to detect potential two-qubit gate crosstalk errors. Any
experimental shots where an idle qubit is measured in the |1i
state are discarded in post-processing. On average, < 4% of
the total data is discarded using this method.
Error Correction Protocol
Global measurement at the end of each circuit provides
the state of all nine data qubits. From this data, we can
calculate the raw total parity, ZL = Z1 Z2 ...Z8 Z9 , and the
eigenvalue of the two Z stabilizers, S1 = Z1 Z4 Z2 Z5 Z3 Z6 and
S2 = Z4 Z7 Z5 Z8 Z6 Z9 . The processed total parity, ZL0 from the
different protocols is then given by the following logic table:
7/23

Protocol
Raw
Correction
Detection

If
True
S1 = −1 k S2 = −1
S1 = −1 k S2 = −1

Then
ZL0 = ZL
ZL0 = −ZL
Discard data

Else
ZL0 = ZL
ZL0 = ZL

8/23

a

Encoding

Error

X Stabilizers

Z Stabilizers

1

2
3
4

5
6

7

8
9

10
11
12
13

b

Encoding

nFT X Stabilizer

c

1

1

2

2

3

3

4

4

5

5

6

6

7

7

8

8

9

9

12

12

Error

Encoding

FT X Stabilizer

Error

Extended Data Figure 1. Stabilizer measurement circuits a, Direct measurement of the full error syndrome. Various single-qubit ”errors”
are introduced on any one of the data qubits to generate different ancilla measurement outcomes. This circuit was used to generate the data in
Figure 4b of the main text. b/c, Non-fault-tolerant (b, red, right) and fault-tolerant (c, blue, right) stabilizer measurement orderings,
performed on a FT-encoded |0iL state (b/c, blue, left). In both cases, a variable error Z(θ ) is introduced on the ancilla qubit in the middle of
the stabilizer measurement operation. These circuits were used to generate the data in Figure 4a of the main text.

9/23

Supplementary Information
State preparation and measurement errors
We characterize the state preparation and measurement (SPAM) errors using the following method. We load a single ion and
prepare it in the |0i state using optical pumping, from which we may also apply an SK151 π-rotation to prepare |1i. To measure
the qubit state, 369 nm light that is resonant with the {2 S1/2 , F = 1} ←→ {2 P1/2 , F = 0} transition is directed onto the ion and
the scattered photons are detected using our array of PMTs. We determine that the ion is bright (dark) when we detect > 1
(≤ 1) photons within a 100 µs window. We measure a SPAM error of 0.71(4)% when the ion is prepared in |1i (the bright
state), and 0.22(2)% for |0i (the dark state), making the average single-qubit SPAM error 0.46(2)%. Table S1 describes the
SPAM error budget, derived either from separate measurements or by fitting Poisson curves to the histogram of photon count
event frequency. The measured average detection cross-talk to neighboring PMTs when the target ion is bright is 0.3(2)%.
SK1 pulse, 1-state and 0-state error
SPAM error on bright ion ≡ |1i
Bright to dark pumping
Thresholding error
Preparation error (1-qubit randomized benchmarking)

Error budget
0.71%
0.55%
0.12%
0.03%

SPAM error on dark ion ≡ |0i
Dark to bright pumping
Preparation error - incomplete pumping
Background dark counts (measured with no ion qubit)

0.22%
0.13%
0.02%
0.07%

Detection cross-talk error (averaged across neighboring PMTs to bright ion)

0.34%

Table S1. State preparation and measurement error budget for a single ion in our system.
Single qubit gate benchmarking
The reported single qubit gate fidelity was measured using single qubit randomized benchmarking54 , using a sequence of up to
20 random Clifford gates, which were decomposed into our native rotation gates and implemented using SK1 composite pulses.
Each random sequence is followed by its inverse in order to, in principle, echo out the gates completely and return the qubit to
the initial |0i state. The degree to which the qubit does not return to the initial state quantifies the infidelity of the circuit. The
measured occupation of the |0i ground state as a function of the number of the applied Clifford gates is shown in Fig. S1. This
benchmarking procedure is performed on a single ion, as well as on an individual qubit in a chain of 15 ions, so as to detect any
adverse affects arising from an increase in the system size. The fitted slope of the occupation of the |0i state as a function of the
number of the applied Clifford gates indicates a per-Clifford error of 3.4(8) × 10−4 on the 15-ion chain, corresponding to an
error of 1.8(3) × 10−4 per native Pauli gate55 . The offset in the fit is consistent with SPAM errors.

Extended Data Figure S1. Randomized benchmarking of single-qubit gates. The probability to measure a single ion in the ground state
after a variable number of Clifford gates in a randomized benchmarking sequence. The slope of the line indicates the per-Clifford fidelity,
while the y-intercept indicates the SPAM error. Fit function for 1 ion chain is 0.9938(8) − N ∗ 1.7(7) × 10−4 , and for 15 ion chain
0.995(1) − N ∗ 3.4(8) × 10−4 . Error bars shown are the standard error of the mean.

10/23

Two-qubit gate performance
Two qubit gate performance was estimated using the results of two gate sequences. On gates with low crosstalk (details in the
following section), we anticipate the dominant error in the XX(π/4) gate will be an over or under-rotation error by a small
angle ε resulting in XX(π/4 + ε). A sequence of N successive applications of the gate will then will result in an accumulated
error of Nε. If the phase of the gate is flipped with each successive application, XX(π/4 + ε)XX(−π/4 − ε)..., then this
particular error is suppressed to the extent that it is stable between applications. We also note that the echo sequence will also
suppress other forms of coherent errors, such as gate crosstalk. We take the echoed sequence to be the ”best-case” scenario and
the non-echoed sequence to be the ”worst-case” scenario. Within a circuit, we expect the true fidelity of a single XX gate to fall
between these two extremes. The fidelity is determined by the parity fringe method56 . We increase the number of XX gates in
the sequence, and take the slope of the fidelity to be the error per gate. The results of this estimation are shown for a single
gate between ions 2 and 3 in the chain of 15 in Fig. S2. Thus, the estimated fidelity of a single XX gate is bounded within
98.5 − 99.3%. In other gates, a decrease in fidelity relative to this estimate is primarily due to effects of crosstalk.

Extended Data Figure S2. Two-qubit gate performance. The cumulative sequence (red) XX(π/4 + ε)XX(π/4 + ε)... results in a total error
of Nε, and the echoed sequence (black) XX(π/4 + ε)XX(−π/4 − ε)... cancels this particular type of over/under-rotation error. The true gate
fidelity lies somewhere in the shaded region. The slope of the two lines determines the error per gate, or the estimated fidelity to be in the
range of 98.5 − 99.3%. Errors are plotted for 95% confidence intervals.

Physical Error Modeling

Raw

1.0

Simulation
Data

0.5

⟨ ZL ⟩

⟨orrection

⟩etection

Simulation
Data

Simulation
Data

0.0
−0.5
−1.0

0

π/2

π

θ

3π/2

2π

0

π/2

π

θ

3π/2

2π

0

π/2

π

3π/2

2π

θ

Extended Data Figure S3. Matching of simulation and experiment. The simulated and experimentally measured data for repeated
applications of the fault-tolerant logical rotation gate applied to a state initially prepared in |0iL . The data points labeled ”data” are the same
as the blue curves shown in Fig 3d of the main text.

11/23

To confirm our understanding of the experimental system, we find it useful to design physical error models that can replicate
our experimental results in simulation. A simple coherent overrotation error model, combined with stochastic measurement and
preparation errors closely matches our results, as shown in Fig. S3. The coherent overrotation error channel for a rotation gate
G is modeled as
εG (ρ) = exp(−iθ G)ρ exp(iθ G),

(S2)

where θ is the angle of overrotation. This model is applied to both the Mølmer-Sørensen gate and the single qubit rotation
gates, where the fidelities presented in the main text are directly translated into values for θ . These two errors are demonstrated
in Fig. S4. The simulation then includes stochastic measurement errors and preparation errors following the SPAM error rates
determined from our benchmarking experiments presented in the SPAM error benchmarking section above. Using this four
parameter error model, we can capture much of the performance of our system.

Extended Data Figure S4. Gate error model for CNOT. One possible choice of native gate decomposition (black) and gate errors (red) for a
CNOT gate.

Circuit optimization for crosstalk
There are several factors to consider when mapping the Bacon-Shor code onto a chain of 15 ions, as shown in Fig. 1 of the
main text. In general, ion chains feature all-to-all two-qubit gate connectivity; however, some gates require more optical power
than others to achieve maximal entanglement. Considering errors that scale with intensity, such as crosstalk, then gate fidelity
is expected to decrease with increasing power requirements. These differences in power requirements can be understood by
examining the mode participation symmetries in the chain. For example, ion 8, the center ion, requires high power in nearly all
of its gates because it only participates in the even spatial modes (i.e., b8,2n = 0, n = 1, 2, ..., 7 where bi,1 is mode-participation
factor of the highest-frequency in-phase radial mode for ion i). So on average, for a fixed gate frequency, the modes that drive
entanglement are further detuned from the gate. We note that this is unique to our choice of amplitude modulated (AM) gates
with a fixed frequency; phase/frequency-modulated (PM/FM) gates or multi-tone gates may have different chain symmetry
considerations.
In Fig. S5, we present the power requirements for the gates in our system. We first optimize the frequency of each gate
across the mode spectrum to find pulse solutions that are robust to mode errors of < 1 kHz. Once the frequency is fixed for
each gate, we calculate the root-mean-square (RMS) Rabi frequency (Ωrms ) of the AM waveform for each red/blue sideband
when brought into resonance with the carrier transition. In our system, we use equal Rabi frequencies to drive both ions i, j in
the gate (Ωi,rms = Ω j,rms ), although this need not be case. The Lamb-Dicke factor (η ≈ 0.08) converts carrier Rabi frequency
to sideband frequency and this factor is normalized by the gate duration (τgate = 225µ s). Using Fig. S5 as a cost matrix, we
manually optimize the mapping so that the required gates in the circuit minimize the total cost. In general, we observe that each
half of the chain has strong coupling to itself, and the two halves of the chain couple well to each other as long as symmetry
of the chain is obeyed (e.g., gates where the ions are with both odd or both even integer offsets from the center of the chain
couple well, but mixed even and odd integer offsets do not). We further note that when considering the full stabilizer circuit, it
is preferable to use ion 8 as a data qubit (maximum 4 gates) than as an ancilla qubit (6 gates). With these considerations, we
arrived at the ion→qubit mapping displayed in Fig. 1 of the main text.
12/23

 * D W H  R Q  , R Q  L

i, rms j, rms( / gate)2

   

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  

   
   
   
   
   
   
                              

 * D W H  R Q  , R Q  M

Extended Data Figure S5. Power requirements for XX gates in our system. For an XX gate on ions i, j, the (RMS) Rabi frequency (Ωrms )
of the AM waveform for each red/blue sideband when brought into resonance with the carrier transition is normalized by the Lamb-Dicke
factor (η ≈ 0.08) and the gate duration (τgate = 225µs). Gate power is used as a proxy for crosstalk, and the ion→qubit mapping is chosen to
minimize the cost matrix.

Magic State Fidelity
To calculate the fidelity of our magic state preparation circuit for the state |Hx iL , we can compute the fidelity between a mixed
state ρ, which represents the experimentally prepared state, and the ideal pure state |ψi as
F = hψ|ρ|ψi
= Tr[ρ|ψihψ|]

1
=
1 + hXiρ hXiψ + hY iρ hY iψ + hZiρ hZiψ
2

1
1
1
=
1 + hXiρ √ + hZiρ √ .
2
2
2

(S3)

The expectation values hZiρ and hXiρ can be extracted by measuring logical Z operator before and after a logical YL (π/2)
operation. This analysis leads to the following fidelities as shown in Table S2.
Processing Technique
Raw
Correction
Detection

Fidelity
0.85 ± 0.01
0.972 ± 0.012
0.98 ± 0.013

Table S2. Fidelities for the |Hx iL magic state preparation circuit under different processing techniques.
However the same procedure cannot be applied to the |Hy iL state, as the [[9,1,3]] Bacon-Shor code does not allow for
fault-tolerant measurement in the logical Y basis. Using the constraint
hXi2 + hY i2 + hZi2 ≤ 1
we can only numerically bound the fidelity of the |Hy iL state to the range 0.75 ≤ F ≤ 0.99. However, we argue that the fidelities
for preparing |Hx iL and |Hy iL should be very similar, as the preparation circuit only differs in the phase of a single qubit gate, a
quantity which we control to ≈ 400µrad limited by the AWG bit depth. This argument is further strengthened by the results of
our single qubit benchmarking. Thus the |Hy iL state fidelity should be very similar to values shown in Table S2.
13/23

Logical T2∗ fits
The Ramsey fringe amplitudes shown in Fig. 2c are calculated by fitting a curve to a logical Ramsey experiment at each wait
time. The data is taken by preparing a |+iL state as shown in Eq. 1, waiting some amount of time t, applying varying RZ(θ )
gates to every qubit and then measuring in the logical X basis via a transversal RYL (−π/2) . Here we will explain the theoretical
fits used for raw, corrected, and detected data processing techniques.
Firstly, as shown in Eq. 1, the logical |+i state we use is composed of three GHZ states √12 (|000i + |111i). Due to the
structure of these states, if a RZ(θ ) gate is applied to each qubit, the three gates will coherently combine, and the end result will
be the same as if a RZ(3θ ) gate had been applied on any single qubit. By considering this simplification we can reduce the
number of error cases we must consider.
For the ’raw’ processing case, any Z error flips the logical output. As a result the cases where 1 or 3 errors occur lead to |−iL
states, while while cases with 0 or 2 errors lead to |+iL . Consequently the expectation value of XL can be thought of as the
squared amplitude of cases which lead to |+iL , subtracted by the squared amplitude of cases which result in |−iL . This results
in a curve
hXL i = cos(3θ /2)6 − 3 cos(3θ /2)4 sin(3θ /2)2 + 3 cos(3θ /2)2 sin(3θ /2)4 − sin(3θ /2)6 = cos(3θ )3 .
In the ’corrected’ processing case, the state can tolerate a single error without having its logical information corrupted. As a
result error cases with 0 or 1 errors lead to |+iL , while 2 or 3 lead to |−iL . This results in the curve
hXL i = cos(3θ /2)6 + 3 cos(3θ /2)4 sin(3θ /2)2 − 3 cos(3θ /2)2 sin(3θ /2)4 − sin(3θ /2)6 .
Lastly the ’detected’ processing method is slightly more complex, as postselection means we must renormalize the expectation
value. The case with 0 errors leads to |+iL , while the case with 3 errors leads to |−iL . Cases with 1 or 2 errors must set
off at least one stabilizer, and as a result those runs will be removed from the dataset. As a result the probabilities must be
renormalized, leading to the curve
cos(3θ /2)6 − sin(3θ /2)6
hXL i =
.
cos(3θ /2)6 + sin(3θ /2)6
In an experiment there will also be imperfections in the states due to errors beyond T2∗ dephasing, which we model to be a
simple depolarization of each GHZ state with strength p. This corresponds to taking a state |+iGHZ → (1 − p)|+ih+|GHZ +
p
2 (|+ih+|GHZ + |−ih−|GHZ ), where the second term, equal to the maximally mixed state on the space spanned by |000i and
|111i, has an expectation value of 0.
In the raw case, any depolarization of the GHZ states will lead to the expectation value going to zero, and as a result the only
non-zero expectation values come about when no depolarization occurs. As a result the overall fringe pattern is simply scaled
by a factor of (1 − p)3 :
hXL i = A(1 − p)3 cos(3θ )3 .
In the correction case the stabilizers are able to identify and correct a single depolarization error. This leads to different cases
for when depolarization occurs and when they do not, which when collated lead to:


3p2 (1 − p)
(cos(3θ /2)6 − sin(3θ /2)6 )
hXL i = (1 − p)3 + 3(1 − p)2 p +
2


3p2 (1 − p)
+ 3(1 − p)3 + 3(1 − p)2 p +
(sin(3θ /2)2 cos(3θ /2)4 − sin(3θ /2)4 cos(3θ /2)2 ).
2
The most complex case is the detection case. Individual depolarizations each contribute a 12 chance of setting off a stabilizer,
and when they do not the coherent rotations on the other qubits produce similar behaviors to the ideal detection case, but only
on the non-depolarized qubits. This leads to the equation:



cos(3θ /2)6 − sin(3θ /2)6
hXL i = A (1 − p)3
cos(3θ /2)6 + sin(3θ /2)6


3p(1 − p)2 cos(3θ /2)4 − sin(3θ /2)4
+
2
cos(3θ /2)4 + sin(3θ /2)4


3p2 (1 − p) cos(3θ /2)2 − sin(3θ /2)2
+
.
4
cos(3θ /2)2 + sin(3θ /2)2
14/23

These models well describe the experimental data, as shown in Fig. S6.
Raw

Detection

Correction

Extended Data Figure S6. Examples of T2∗ fits. These plots exemplify logical Ramsey fringe fitting at two different wait times, 0ms (left)
and 14ms (right). At short wait times (left), the data shows characteristics of error correction, such as the flattened top for error-detection. At
longer wait times (right), the amplitude of each curve decreases due to T2∗ , but also the flat features of the curves blur due to GHZ
depolarization. In both cases, the error model well matches the experimental data. Error bars are the 95% binomial proportion confidence
interval

Physical T2∗
To understand the phase flip errors in the logical qubit, we measure the T2∗ of the physical qubits in a chain of 15 ions. This is
accomplished via a laser Raman Ramsey sequence on the center ion, RY (π/2) − τwait − RZ(θ ) − RY (−π/2), with no echoes.
At each wait time τwait , the phase θ is swept, and the resulting data is fit to a sinusoid to extract the contrast. The Ramsey
∗
contrast is fit to a decaying exponential Ae−τwait /T2 to extract T2∗ . The results of this experiment are shown in Fig. S7. We find
∗
T2 = 610(120) ms for a physical qubit in a chain of 15 ions. We attribute the physical qubit decoherence primarily to control
noise, rather than to fundamental qubit decoherence. In particular, we note that there are features of revivals at ≈ 8 ms and 16
ms, corresponding to noise at ≈ 125 Hz. We assign this to mechanical fluctuations (e.g., fans) that shift the standing wave of
the optical Raman beams relative to the ions. This effect can be mitigated by switching to a ”phase-insensitive” configuration57 .

Ramsey Fringe Amplitude

T2* = 610(120) ms
0.98
0.97
0.96
0.95
0.94
0.93
0.92

0

5

10

Wait Time (ms)

15

20

Extended Data Figure S7. Raman T2∗ for a physical qubit in a 15-ion chain. Ramsey fringes with variable wait times are fit to a sinusoud
to extract the contrast. For each data point, the error bars represent the 95% confidence interval from a maximal likelihood estimation fit of a
∗
sinuosoid. The contrast is fit to a decaying exponential Ae−τwait /T2 , with fit value T2∗ = 610(120) ms. The shaded region indicates the 1σ
uncertainty in the exponential least-squares fit.

To investigate the degree to which control errors impact our physical T2∗ qubit decoherence, we perform microwave Ramsey
15/23

experiments, which are not sensitive to optical beam path fluctuations. Additionally, we suppress magnetic field inhomogeneity
using a dynamical decoupling technique that applies π-pulses with alternating 90° phase offsets, commonly known as an (XY )N
pulse sequence58 , to periodically refocus the qubit spin. Due to a strong microwave drive field gradient along the ion chain, the
π-pulse times are only well calibrated for three neighboring ions in the chain, which we center on the middle ion (8) in the
chain. At each wait time, the phase of the fringe is swept, and the resulting data is fit to a sinusoid to extract the contrast. The
2
resulting data is shown in Fig. S8. We observe that the resulting decay is better fit to a Gaussian (Ae−(τwait /T2 ) ), compared to an
exponential decay, with average T2 = 2.84(16) s. The coherence time of this echo experiment is limited by residual magnetic
field noise, which can be improved by operating our qubit in a lower bias-field or by using magnetic shielding. We note that
T2 > 1 hour has been achieved in 171 Yb+59 .

Ramsey Fringe Amplitude

1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
1/e
Ion 7
Ion 8
Ion 9

0.2
0.0

0.0

0.5

1.0

1.5

2.0

Wait Time (s)

2.5

3.0

Extended Data Figure S8. Microwave T2 for a physical qubit in a 15-ion chain. An (XY )N dynamical decoupling sequence is used to
suppress magnetic field noise. Ramsey fringes with variable wait times are fit to a sinusoud to extract the contrast. For each data point, the
2
error bars represent the 1σ confidence interval from a least-squares fit of a sinuosoid. The contrast is fit to a Gaussian decay Ae−(τwait /T2 ) ,
with average fit value T2 = 2.84(16) s.

Ramsey Fringe Amplitude

1.0

Predicted GHZ
GHZ 1
GHZ 2
GHZ 3

0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4

0.0 2.5 5.0 7.5 10.0 12.5 15.0 17.5 20.0

Wait Time (ms)

Extended Data Figure S9. T2∗ for GHZ states. Ramsey fringes for each independent GHZ state are analyzed from the logical T2∗ experiment
in Fig. 2c of the main text. For each data point, the error bars represent the 95% confidence interval from a maximal likelihood estimation fit
of a sinuosoid. For the theoretical prediction, we apply the fitted dephasing noise in Fig. S7 to a numerical simulation of a three-qubit GHZ
state. The shaded region indicates the 1σ uncertainty in the exponential least-squares fit in Fig. S7, propagated through the numerical
simulation.

The GHZ states that make up the Bacon-Shor code (|000i + |111i) are three times as sensitive to phase noise as our physical
qubit. To understand the implication of the Raman T2∗ on the logical T2∗ , we run numerical simulations to extrapolate the
16/23

measured phase noise to a GHZ state. We assume that the Pauli-Z noise in the middle of the Ramsey sequence is Gaussian
distributed with some width ∆Z . Using the fit from Fig. S7, we can numerically solve for the width of the noise spectrum
∆Z . Once this value is found, we re-run the simulation with that noise spectrum on a three-qubit GHZ state to extract the
predicted contrast. In Fig. S9, we compare this predicted value to the three individual GHZ states measured in the logical
qubit experiment. We conclude that almost all the dephasing in the logical qubit that we observe is explained by the observed
T2∗ - decay in the physical qubit. We note that this is the same experimental data presented in Fig. 2c of the main text, just
post-processed to analyze individual GHZ states rather than to perform error-correction.
Bacon-Shor gauge operators
The Bacon-Shor code is an example of a subsystem quantum error correcting code. These codes have additional quantum
degrees of freedom which are not protected to the same distance as the logical degree of freedom. In the [[9,1,3]] Bacon-Shor
code, there are 4 additional degrees of freedom referred to as gauge qubits. One basis for the gauge qubits corresponds to fixing
4 constraints on the eigenvalues of the operators shown in the table below.
X-gauges
X1 X2
X4 X5
X7 X8
X2 X3
X5 X6
X8 X9

Z-gauges
Z1 Z4
Z2 Z5
Z3 Z6
Z4 Z7
Z5 Z8
Z6 Z9

It should be noted that this is not an independent set of operators because the stabilizers of the code, which are products of
gauges, already have their eigenvalues fixed to +1. As such, if the X-gauges X1 X2 and X4 X5 both have eigenvalue +1 on a
given logical state, then the eigenvalue of X7 X8 will also be +1. We refer to a state in which all X(Z)-type gauge operators have
eigenvalue +1 as the |XiG (|ZiG ) gauge. It should be noted that these gauge operators do not commute, so these two gauges are
mutually exclusive. When decoding the Bacon-Shor code, we can only identify operators up to a product of gauges. When the
correction is applied, we may have inadvertently applied a gauge operator to the logical state. This leaves our logical qubit
unaffected, but will alter the state of the gauge qubits.
Logical Pauli operators on a subsystem code decompose as a tensor product of operations on the logical and gauge degrees
of freedom. When a logical Pauli operator that acts non-trivially on the gauge subsystem is used to generate a continuous
unitary operator, it will entangle the logical and gauge subsystems. As these gauge subsystems are less protected than the
logical subsystem, the information will be less protected. Consequently, one must design continuous logical operators around
logical Pauli operations that commute with the entire gauge group, ensuring that it acts trivially on the gauge subsystem.
Fit values for logical gate operations
In Table. S3 and S4, we report the numerical values obtained from fitting the logical gate operations as displayed in Fig. 4d of
the main text. In addition to the FT transversal gate and the nFT continuous gate, we also provide the fit values for a similar
sampling of states in the logical XZ-plane generated from the nFT encoding circuit (Fig. 2a of main text). Error values are
reported as the 1σ from a Gaussian approximation to a maximal likelihood estimation fit. The Gaussian approximation fails
when the fit parameters are at or equal to their extrema (e.g., when A ≃ 1), in which case asymmetric error bars are given by the
1σ upper
notation (1σ lower ).
Amplitude (A)
FT Gate
nFT Gate
nFT Encoding

Raw
0.923(6)
0.89(1)
0.78(1)

Error Correction
0.996(1)
0.87(1)
0.982(5)

Error Detection
1.000(03 )
1.00(01 )
0.997(2)

Table S3. Numerical values for the fit parameter A.
Gate Error (Γ)
FT Gate
nFT Gate
nFT Encoding

Raw
0.044(3)
0.015(5)
0.001(6)

Error Correction
0.0027(7)
0.000(4)
0.000(2)

Error Detection
0.0002(1)
0.011(2)
0.001(1)

Table S4. Numerical values for the fit parameter Γ.

17/23

Stabilizers on different input states
In the main text (Fig 3a), we describe an experiment to measure X-type errors on the logical qubit state propagated from a
Z-type errors on an ancilla during a FT X stabilizer measurement circuit. In that experiment, there was no detectable change in
the error rate. However, because the input and measured state was |0iL , the measurement is only sensitive to X-type errors. To
check if the stabilizer is introducing Z-type errors into the logical qubit, we perform the same experiment (with no artificial error
added) on the |+iL input state. |+iL is measured in the hXiL basis by a transversal YL (−π/2) gate that maps hXiL → hZiL . We
also check a Z stabilizers on both input states. The results are shown in Table S5. We note that from the logical T2∗ experiment,
we expect the error on the |+iL state to increase by 1.8% over the ≈ 1.5ms required to measure the stabilizer, which is not
included in the baseline encoding error below.
Input State
|0iL
|+iL

Baseline Encoding
(% Error)
0.23(13)
0.45(11)

FT Z Stabilizer
(% Error)
0.41(10)
3.3(3)

FT X Stabilizer
(% Error)
0.20(13)
2.1(2)

Table S5. Logical error rates for both Z and X FT stabilizers on different logical input states, after error-correction.
Uncertainties are 1σ from the binomial distribution.

Extended stabilizer results
In Fig. 3 of the main text, we presented a representative sample of artificially introduced errors and the corresponding ancilla
qubit populations. Here in Fig. S10, we present a full set of errors that produce all of the possible ancilla qubit output bit strings.

Extended Data Figure S10. Full stabilizer measurement results. A complete set of errors are introduced to create all possible output bit
strings of the ancilla qubits. Error bars are the 95% binomial proportion confidence interval.

For a given error, each stabilizer measurement yields a deterministic eigenvalue measurement (e.g., {+1, −1, −1, +1)} that
is mapped to the ancilla qubit state (e.g., {0, 1, 1, 0}). Defining the error as the difference between the expected ancilla bit
string and the measured populations, and averaging across all the artificial errors, we obtain the following total error for each
stabilizer measurement:
Stabilizer
S1 = Z1 Z4 Z2 Z5 Z3 Z6
S2 = Z4 Z7 Z5 Z8 Z6 Z9
S3 = X1 X2 X4 X5 X7 X8
S4 = X2 X3 X5 X6 X8 X9

Total Error (εSi )
0.244(3)
0.298(6)
0.179(3)
0.248(3)

In this experiment, the stabilizers are measured in the order S3 , S4 , S1 , S2 . We note from the data presented in Fig. 2 of the
main text, the raw encoding of the |0iL state has a base εenc = 0.038(2) error, which we assume is isotropic in the sense that all
stabilizer measurements should see the error equally. Additionally, stabilizer measurements will detect errors introduced by
itself or previous stabilizer measurements, which we assume to be isotropic as well. The per stabilizer error can be calculated by
the differential error between successive stabilizer measurements. We calculate εZ = 0.064(7) per Z-stabilizer (avg. 98.9% gate
fidelity) and εX = 0.069(5) per X-stabilizer (avg. 98.8% gate fidelity). Finally, we observe an error offset on the X-stabilizers
18/23

relative to the Z-stabilizers of εT2∗ = 0.072(5), consistent with a Z-type error caused by the logical qubit dephasing (T2∗ ) over
the wall-clock time it takes to measure the X-stabilizers (≈ 3 ms), as presented in Fig. 2c of the main text. In conclusion, we
find that the total stabilizer measurement error for each ancilla qubit is well explained by the following error model:
εS1 = εenc + 2εX + εZ
εS2 = εenc + 2εX + 2εZ

(S4)

εS3 = εenc + εT2∗ + εX
εS4 = εenc + εT2∗ + 2εX
Native Gate Circuit Library
1

|0/1i

2

|0i

3

|0i

4

|0/1i

5

|0i

6

|0i

7

|0/1i

8

|0i

9

|0i

XX( π4 )

XX( π4 )

XX( π4 )

✌✌✌
RZ( π2 )

XX(− π4 )

✌✌✌
RZ(− π2 )

✌✌✌
✌✌✌

RZ( π2 )

XX(− π4 )

✌✌✌
RZ(− π2 )

✌✌✌
✌✌✌

RZ( π2 )

XX(− π4 )

✌✌✌
RZ(− π2 )

✌✌✌

Extended Data Figure S11. Native gate compilation for encoding |0/1iL . To create the |0/1iL state, qubits 1, 4, and 7 should be initialized
in the |0/1i state, respectively. Corresponds to the blue Clifford circuit in Fig. 2a and the blue data in Fig. 2b of the main text/
Encoding
1

|0/1i

2

|0i

3

|0i

4

|0/1i

5

|0i

6

|0i

7

|0/1i

8

|0i

9

|0i

XX( π4 )

XX( π4 )

XX( π4 )

RZ( π2 )

RZ( π2 )

RZ( π2 )

XX(− π4 )

XX(− π4 )

XX(− π4 )

RZ(− π2 )

RZ(− π2 )

RZ(− π2 )

Measure
hXi
✤❴ ❴ ❴ ❴ ❴ ✤ L
RY ( π2 ) ✤ RY (− π2 ) ✤
✤
✤
✤
✤
π
π
RY ( 2 ) ✤ RY (− 2 ) ✤
✤
✤
✤
✤
RY ( π2 ) ✤ RY (− π2 ) ✤
✤
✤
RY ( π2 ) ✤ RY (− π2 ) ✤
✤
✤
✤
✤
π
π
RY ( 2 ) ✤ RY (− 2 ) ✤
✤
✤
✤
✤
π
π
RY ( 2 ) ✤ RY (− 2 ) ✤
✤
✤
RY ( π2 ) ✤ RY (− π2 ) ✤
✤
✤
✤
✤
π
π
RY ( 2 ) ✤ RY (− 2 ) ✤
✤
✤
✤
✤
RY ( π2 ) ✤ RY (− π2 ) ✤
❴ ❴ ❴ ❴ ❴

✌✌✌
✌✌✌
✌✌✌
✌✌✌
✌✌✌
✌✌✌
✌✌✌
✌✌✌
✌✌✌

Extended Data Figure S12. Native gate compilation for encoding | + /−iL . To create the | + /−iL state, qubits 1, 4, and 7 should be
initialized in the |0/1i state, respectively. We note that we do not compile out the successive RY (± π2 ) gates on each qubit, as this would
create a circuit identical to S11 - this explains the additional error on | + /−iL states relative to |0/1iL . Corresponds to the blue circuit in
Fig. 2a and the blue data in Fig. 2b of the main text.

19/23

1

|0i

2

|0i

3

|0i

4

|0i

5

|0i

6

|0i

7

|0i

8

|0i

9

|0i

R(θ, φ) RY ( π2 ) XX( π4 ) XX(− π4 ) RY (− π2 )

XX( π4 )

RX(− π2 )

XX(− π4 )

RX( π2 )

XX( π4 )

XX( π4 )

XX( π4 )

✌✌✌
RZ( π2 )

XX(− π4 )

✌✌✌
RZ(− π2 )

✌✌✌
✌✌✌

RZ( π2 )

XX(− π4 )

✌✌✌
RZ(− π2 )

✌✌✌
✌✌✌

RZ( π2 )

XX(− π4 )

✌✌✌
RZ(− π2 )

✌✌✌

Extended Data Figure S13. Native gate compilation for nFT encoding of arbitrary logical states. This circuit can create an arbitrary
|ψiL state controlled by the initial R(θ , φ ) gate on qubit 1, with |ψi1 = R(θ , φ )|0i1 . Corresponds to the red circuit in Fig. 2a and the red data
in Fig. 2b of the main text. This circuit is also used for initial encoding of the magic states in Fig. c-d of the main text.

1

RX( π2 )

2

XX(− π4 ) RZ(− π2 )

3

XX(− π4 )

RZ(− π2 ) XX(− π4 )
XX(− π4 )

4

XX(− π4 ) RZ(− π2 )

RZ( π2 ) XX( π4 ) RX(− π2 )
XX(θ)

RZ( π2 )
XX( π4 )

XX( π4 )

RZ( π2 )

XX( π4 )
XX( π4 )

5
6
7

XX(− π4 )

XX( π4 )

8
9

Extended Data Figure S14. Native gate compilation for nFT continuous rotation. This circuit implements a YL (θ ) = Y1 Z2 Z3 X4 X7 (θ )
rotation controlled by an XX(θ ) gate on qubits 1 and 2. Corresponds to the red circuit in Fig. 3b and the red data in Fig. 3d-e of the main text.

20/23

1

RY (+) XX(+)

2

RY (+)

3

RY (+)

4

RY (+)

5

RY (+)

6

RY (+)

7

RY (+)

8

RY (+)

9

RY (+)

10

|0i

11

|0i

RX(−) RY (−)
RX(−) RY (−)

XX(+)

RX(−) RY (−)

XX(+)
XX(−)

RY (−)

XX(+)
XX(−)

RY (−)

XX(+)
XX(−)

RY (−)

XX(+)

RX(+) RY (−)

XX(−)

RX(+) RY (−)

XX(−)

XX(−) RX(+) RY (−)
✌✌✌

XX(+) XX(−) XX(+) XX(−) XX(+) XX(−)
XX(+) XX(−) XX(+) XX(−) XX(+) XX(−)

✌✌✌

Extended Data Figure S15. Native gate compilation for Z stabilizer measurement. Here, the angle (+/−) is shorthand for (± π2 ) or (± π4 )
for single- or two-qubit gates, respectively. When combined with encoding (Fig. S11) and the X stabilizer (Fig. S16), the combined circuits
measure the full syndrome (Extended Data Fig. 1a).

1

XX(−)

2

RX(−)
XX(+)

XX(−)

3

XX(+)

4

RX(+)

XX(−)

5

RX(−)
XX(+)

XX(−)

6

XX(+)

7

RX(+)

XX(−)

8

RX(−)
XX(+)

XX(−)

9

XX(+) RX(+)

12

|0i

13

|0i

✌✌✌

XX(−) XX(+) XX(−) XX(+) XX(−) XX(+)
XX(−) XX(+) XX(−) XX(+) XX(−) XX(+)

✌✌✌

Extended Data Figure S16. Native gate compilation for FT X stabilizer measurement. Here, the angle (+/−) is shorthand for (± π2 ) or
(± π4 ) for single- or two-qubit gates, respectively. Corresponds to the circuit in Extended Data Fig. 1c and for data presented in Fig. 4a of the
main text.

References
1. Feynman, R. P. Quantum mechanical computers. Foundations Phys. 16, 507–531 (1986).
2. Abrams, D. S. & Lloyd, S. Simulation of many-body fermi systems on a universal quantum computer. Phys. Rev. Lett. 79,
2586 (1997).
3. Aspuru-Guzik, A., Dutoi, A. D., Love, P. J. & Head-Gordon, M. Simulated quantum computation of molecular energies.
Science 309, 1704–1707 (2005).
21/23

4. Reiher, M., Wiebe, N., Svore, K. M., Wecker, D. & Troyer, M. Elucidating reaction mechanisms on quantum computers.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 114, 7555–7560 (2017).
5. Shor, P. W. Polynomial-time algorithms for prime factorization and discrete logarithms on a quantum computer. SIAM Rev.
41, 303–332 (1999).
6. Von Burg, V. et al. Quantum computing enhanced computational catalysis. Preprint at https://arxiv.org/abs/2007.14460
(2020).
7. Gidney, C. & Ekerå, M. How to factor 2048 bit rsa integers in 8 hours using 20 million noisy qubits. Preprint at
https://arxiv.org/abs/1905.09749 (2019).
8. Aharonov, D. & Ben-Or, M. Fault-tolerant quantum computation with constant error rate. SIAM J. on Comput. (2008).
9. Knill, E., Laflamme, R. & Zurek, W. Threshold accuracy for quantum computation. Preprint at https://arxiv.org/abs/quantph/9610011 (1996).
10. Gottesman, D. E. Stabilizer Codes and Quantum Error Correction. Ph.D. thesis, California Institute of Technology (1997).
11. Shor, P. W. Scheme for reducing decoherence in quantum computer memory. Phys. Rev. A 52, R2493 (1995).
12. Knill, E. & Laflamme, R. Theory of quantum error-correcting codes. Phys. Rev. A 55, 900 (1997).
13. Córcoles, A. D. et al. Demonstration of a quantum error detection code using a square lattice of four superconducting
qubits. Nat. Commun. 6, 1–10 (2015).
14. Takita, M., Cross, A. W., Córcoles, A., Chow, J. M. & Gambetta, J. M. Experimental demonstration of fault-tolerant state
preparation with superconducting qubits. Phys. Rev. Lett. 119, 180501 (2017).
15. Linke, N. M. et al. Fault-tolerant quantum error detection. Sci. Adv. 3, e1701074 (2017).
16. Harper, R. & Flammia, S. T. Fault-tolerant logical gates in the ibm quantum experience. Phys. Rev. Lett. 122, 080504
(2019).
17. Andersen, C. K. et al. Repeated quantum error detection in a surface code. Nat. Phys. 1–6 (2020).
18. Cory, D. G. et al. Experimental quantum error correction. Phys. Rev. Lett. 81, 2152 (1998).
19. Chiaverini, J. et al. Realization of quantum error correction. Nature 432, 602–605 (2004).
20. Schindler, P. et al. Experimental repetitive quantum error correction. Science 332, 1059–1061 (2011).
21. Reed, M. D. et al. Realization of three-qubit quantum error correction with superconducting circuits. Nature 482, 382–385
(2012).
22. Riste, D. et al. Detecting bit-flip errors in a logical qubit using stabilizer measurements. Nat. Commun. 6, 1–6 (2015).
23. Kelly, J. et al. State preservation by repetitive error detection in a superconducting quantum circuit. Nature 519, 66–69
(2015).
24. Gong, M. et al. Experimental verification of five-qubit quantum error correction with superconducting qubits. Preprint at
https://arxiv.org/abs/1907.04507 (2019).
25. Nigg, D. et al. Quantum computations on a topologically encoded qubit. Science 345, 302–305 (2014).
26. Luo, Y.-H. et al.
Quantum teleportation of physical qubits into logical code-spaces.
https://arxiv.org/abs/2009.06242 (2020).

Preprint at

27. Heeres, R. W. et al. Implementing a universal gate set on a logical qubit encoded in an oscillator. Nat. communications 8,
1–7 (2017).
28. Flühmann, C. et al. Encoding a qubit in a trapped-ion mechanical oscillator. Nature 566, 513–517 (2019).
29. Ofek, N. et al. Extending the lifetime of a quantum bit with error correction in superconducting circuits. Nature 536,
441–445 (2016).
30. Campagne-Ibarcq, P. et al. Quantum error correction of a qubit encoded in grid states of an oscillator. Nature 584, 368–372
(2020).
31. Bravyi, S. & Kitaev, A. Universal quantum computation with ideal clifford gates and noisy ancillas. Phys. Rev. A 71,
022316 (2005).
32. Maunz, P. L. W. High optical access trap 2.0. Sandia Natl. Lab. Rep. No. SAND2016-0796R (2016).
33. Debnath, S. et al. Demonstration of a small programmable quantum computer with atomic qubits. Nature 563, 63 (2016).
22/23

34. Wright, K. et al. Benchmarking an 11-qubit quantum computer. Nat. communications 10, 1–6 (2019).
35. Bacon, D. Operator quantum error-correcting subsystems for self-correcting quantum memories. Phys. Rev. A 73, 012340
(2006).
36. Aliferis, P. & Cross, A. W. Subsystem fault tolerance with the Bacon-Shor code. Phys. Rev. Lett. 98, 220502 (2007).
37. Debroy, D. M., Li, M., Huang, S. & Brown, K. R. Logical performance of 9 qubit compass codes in ion traps with crosstalk
errors. Quantum Sci. Technol. 5, 034002 (2020).
38. Li, M., Miller, D. & Brown, K. R. Direct measurement of Bacon-Shor code stabilizers. Phys. Rev. A 98, 050301 (2018).
39. Shor, P. Fault-tolerant quantum computation. Proc. 37th Conf. on Foundations Comput. Sci. (1996).
40. Terhal, B. M. Quantum error correction for quantum memories. Rev. Mod. Phys. 87, 307 (2015).
41. Dennis, E., Kitaev, A., Landahl, A. & Preskill, J. Topological quantum memory. J. Math. Phys. 43, 4452–4505 (2002).
42. Li, M., Miller, D., Newman, M., Wu, Y. & Brown, K. R. 2D compass codes. Phys. Rev. X 9, 021041 (2019).
43. Reichardt, B. W. Quantum universality from magic states distillation applied to CSS codes. Quantum Inf. Process. 4,
251–264 (2005).
44. Lidar, D. A., Chuang, I. L. & Whaley, K. B. Decoherence-free subspaces for quantum computation. Phys. Rev. Lett. 81,
2594 (1998).
45. Kielpinski, D. et al. A decoherence-free quantum memory using trapped ions. Science 291, 1013–1015 (2001).
46. Eastin, B. & Knill, E. Restrictions on transversal encoded quantum gate sets. Phys. Rev. Lett. 102, 110502 (2009).
47. Cetina, M. et al. Quantum gates on individually-addressed atomic qubits subject to noisy transverse motion. Preprint at
https://arxiv.org/abs/2007.06768 (2020).
48. Kielpinski, D., Monroe, C. & Wineland, D. J. Architecture for a large-scale ion-trap quantum computer. Nature 417,
709–711 (2002).
49. Home, J. P. et al. Complete methods set for scalable ion trap quantum information processing. Science 325, 1227–1230
(2009).
50. Pino, J. et al.
Demonstration of the QCCD trapped-ion quantum computer architecture.
https://arxiv.org/abs/2003.01293 (2020).

Preprint at

51. Brown, K. R., Harrow, A. W. & Chuang, I. L. Arbitrarily accurate composite pulse sequences. Phys. Rev. A 70, 052318
(2004).
52. Mølmer, K. & Sørensen, A. Multiparticle entanglement of hot trapped ions. Phys. Rev. Lett. 82, 1835 (1999).
53. Maslov, D. Basic circuit compilation techniques for an ion-trap quantum machine. New J. Phys. 19, 023035 (2017).
54. Knill, E. et al. Randomized benchmarking of quantum gates. Phys. Rev. A 77, 012307 (2008).
55. Barends, R. et al. Superconducting quantum circuits at the surface code threshold for fault tolerance. Nature 508, 500–503
(2014).
56. Sackett, C. A. et al. Experimental entanglement of four particles. Nature 404, 256–259 (2000). Number: 6775 Publisher:
Nature Publishing Group.
57. Inlek, I., Vittorini, G., Hucul, D., Crocker, C. & Monroe, C. Quantum gates with phase stability over space and time. Phys.
Rev. A 90, 042316 (2014).
58. Gullion, T., Baker, D. B. & Conradi, M. S. New, compensated carr-purcell sequences. J. Magn. Reson. (1969) 89, 479–484
(1990).
59. Wang, P. et al. Single ion-qubit exceeding one hour coherence time. Preprint at https://arxiv.org/abs/2008.00251 (2020).

23/23

