              International Journal of
              Molecular Sciences


Article
Impact of DNA Repair Kinetics and Dose Rate on RBE
Predictions in the UNIVERSE
Hans Liew 1,2,3,4,5,6 , Stewart Mein 2,3,4,5 , Thomas Tessonnier 5 , Christian P. Karger 3,7 , Amir Abdollahi 2,3,4,5 ,
Jürgen Debus 1,2,3,4,5,6 , Ivana Dokic 2,3,4,5 and Andrea Mairani 2,3,4,5, *

                                           1   Clinical Cooperation Unit Radiation Oncology, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ),
                                               69120 Heidelberg, Germany; h.liew@dkfz-heidelberg.de (H.L.); juergen.debus@med.uni-heidelberg.de (J.D.)
                                           2   Division of Molecular and Translational Radiation Oncology, National Center for Tumor Diseases (NCT),
                                               Heidelberg University Hospital, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany; s.mein@dkfz-heidelberg.de (S.M.);
                                               a.amir@dkfz-heidelberg.de (A.A.); i.dokic@dkfz-heidelberg.de (I.D.)
                                           3   Heidelberg Institute of Radiation Oncology (HIRO), German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ),
                                               69120 Heidelberg, Germany; c.karger@dkfz-heidelberg.de
                                           4   German Cancer Consortium (DKTK), 69120 Heidelberg, Germany
                                           5   Heidelberg Ion-Beam Therapy Center (HIT), 69120 Heidelberg, Germany;
                                               thomas.tessonnier@med.uni-heidelberg.de
                                           6   Faculty of Physics and Astronomy, Heidelberg University, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany
                                           7   Department of Medical Physics in Radiation Oncology, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ),
                                               69120 Heidelberg, Germany
                                           *   Correspondence: andrea.mairani@med.uni-heidelberg.de; Tel.: +49-0-6221-56-37535


                                           Abstract: Accurate knowledge of the relative biological effectiveness (RBE) and its dependencies is
                                           crucial to support modern ion beam therapy and its further development. However, the influence
                                           of different dose rates of the reference radiation and ion beam are rarely considered. The ion beam
                                           RBE-model within our “UNIfied and VERSatile bio response Engine” (UNIVERSE) is extended by
Citation: Liew, H.; Mein, S.;
                                           including DNA damage repair kinetics to investigate the impact of dose-rate effects on the predicted
Tessonnier, T.; Karger, C.P.; Abdollahi,
                                           RBE. It was found that dose-rate effects increase with dose and biological effects saturate at high
A.; Debus, J.; Dokic, I.; Mairani, A.
Impact of DNA Repair Kinetics and
                                           dose-rates, which is consistent with data- and model-based studies in the literature. In a comparison
Dose Rate on RBE Predictions in the        with RBE measurements from a high dose in-vivo study, the predictions of the presented modification
UNIVERSE. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022, 23,      were found to be improved in comparison to the previous version of UNIVERSE and existing clinical
6268. https://doi.org/10.3390/             approaches that disregard dose-rate effects. Consequently, DNA repair kinetics and the different
ijms23116268                               dose rates applied by the reference and ion beams might need to be considered in biophysical
                                           models to accurately predict the RBE. Additionally, this study marks an important step in the further
Academic Editor: Krzysztof
Bobrowski                                  development of UNIVERSE, extending its capabilities in giving theoretical guidance to support
                                           progress in ion beam therapy.
Received: 13 April 2022
Accepted: 30 May 2022
                                           Keywords: ionizing radiation; ion beam therapy; UNIVERSE; dose rate; DNA repair; modeling; RBE;
Published: 3 June 2022
                                           rat spinal cord
Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral
with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional affil-
iations.                                   1. Introduction
                                                 The favorable dose distribution and increased relative biological effectiveness (RBE)
                                           of ion beams in comparison to conventional radiation sources has driven their increasing
                                           adoption in radiotherapy. The RBE is defined as the ratio of doses applied by a reference
Copyright: © 2022 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
                                           radiation (normally photons) and an ion beam of interest to achieve the same biological
This article is an open access article
                                           effect and serves a central role as a metric in both radiobiology and radiation therapy. In
distributed under the terms and            clinical practice, a constant RBE of 1.1 for proton beams has been widely accepted as a sen-
conditions of the Creative Commons         sible approximation. However, the proton RBE has been found to be dependent on several
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://      factors, most prominently the dose and linear energy transfer (LET) of the particles, with
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/           experimental evidence and biophysical models consistently implying an increase of RBE
4.0/).                                     with LET [1,2]. As part of the world’s first clinical application of a raster scanned helium ion



Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022, 23, 6268. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms23116268                                          https://www.mdpi.com/journal/ijms
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022, 23, 6268                                                                                           2 of 18




                                   beam at the Heidelberg Ion-beam Therapy Center (HIT) in July 2021, treatment plans were
                                   based on RBE predictions from the “modified microdosimetric kinetic model” (mMKM) [3].
                                   The model was previously tuned [4] and benchmarked [5] using extensive in-vitro data
                                   on the biological effect of helium beams as a function of dose and LET. The “UNIfied and
                                   VERSatile bio-response Engine” (UNIVERSE) is a mechanistic modeling framework being
                                   developed with the goal of enabling the description of clinically relevant modifying factors
                                   of radiation action for both conventional and ion beam irradiations [6–10]. It is supposed
                                   to help interpret pre-clinical studies, support the development of innovative radiotherapy
                                   concepts, and assess the necessity as well as implications of including additional parame-
                                   ters into clinical treatment planning. For example, the ion beam model of the framework
                                   was recently established [9], including a description of the effect of interference on the DNA
                                   damage repair process, which is consistent with its earlier published implementation for
                                   conventional radiation sources [6]. This allowed for the investigation of the effect of such a
                                   modifier of radiation action on the predicted RBE and its meaning for clinical scenarios.
                                         Experimental investigations of the effect of the applied dose rates of both radiation
                                   modalities on the RBE of ion beams remain limited, although they are motivated by several
                                   applications, including the effect of bursts of cosmic radiation in spaceflight [11], the
                                   application of increased dose rates to avoid respiratory gating in radiotherapy [12], and
                                   investigations of the differential effects of laser driven ion beams [13–15]. Historically,
                                   dose-rate effects were rationalized using concepts such as the recovery of a finite repair
                                   capacity of the cell or its repair of sub-lesions [16]. The latter idea is followed to some
                                   extent by extensions of modern mechanistically motivated ion beam models, which include
                                   repair kinetics of DNA lesions to allow predictions of the effect of the dose rate [17–21].
                                   In line with the sparse experimental data [12], studies of clinical scenarios based on these
                                   models predict the limited impact of the dose rate at lower doses, which are applied in
                                   conventionally fractionated ion beam therapy (~2 Gy) but expected a substantial loss of
                                   effectiveness in protracted irradiations at high doses, which are typical of hypofractionated
                                   approaches [17–21]. However, a study based on a more phenomenological modeling
                                   approach suggests that even at doses as low as 2 Gy, dose-rate effects could lead to local
                                   inhomogeneities in the effectiveness of actively scanned proton beams if the irradiation time
                                   is significantly prolonged [22]. While they were benchmarked using data from a split-dose
                                   experiment with a single dose and energy setting [17], none of the mentioned dose-rate
                                   extensions of mechanistic ion beam models were benchmarked against any measurements
                                   in clinically relevant fields (e.g., actively scanned SOBPs) or at high doses commonly
                                   applied in preclinical in-vivo experiments [17,20,21].
                                         In the study presented here, the ion beam model of UNIVERSE is combined with a
                                   description of DNA damage repair kinetics that considers the clustering of damages, which
                                   has been successfully established in an earlier publication to describe dose-rate effects for
                                   sparsely ionizing radiation [8]. Applying this new model, we now investigate the impact
                                   of damage repair on the response to ion beams—as well as on the reference radiation—and
                                   thus on the RBE predictions within UNIVERSE and whether the changes are consistent with
                                   the trends described in the literature. Ultimately, predictions of the modified UNIVERSE, its
                                   previous version, and the existing clinical approaches are compared to RBE data obtained
                                   in rat spinal cord irradiated with high doses in a proton and helium spread-out Bragg
                                   peak (SOBP) by Saager et al. [23] and Hintz et al. [24], respectively. The benchmark will
                                   allow us to assess the necessity for biophysical models to consider dose-rate effects to
                                   accurately predict clinically relevant high dose in-vivo measurements and judge the ability
                                   of UNIVERSE to include another key parameter to its predictions, thereby increasing its
                                   potential to give theoretical guidance in pre-clinical studies.
                                         In this work, only dose rates applied in conventional clinical ion beams are consid-
                                   ered, thus potential tissue sparing effects that might arise at ultra-high dose rates are not
                                   considered within the presented model.
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022, 23, 6268                                                                                               3 of 18




                                   2. Results
                                         To study the general impact of introducing DNA repair kinetics and the applied dose
                                   rate into the UNIVERSE, the proton RBE was simulated over the range of 0.1 to 10 Gy/s
                                   at 2, 6, 12, and 24 Gy, each at 2, 8, and 25 keV/µm (Figures 1 and 2). For each setting, the
                                   proton RBE was calculated with respect to a sparsely ionizing reference radiation at a fixed
                                   dose rate (2 Gy/min; green dashed line) as well as at the same dose rate as the proton
                                   irradiation (dotted orange line) by using the extended version of the UNIVERSE. To improve
                                   readability, the two definitions will be referred to as “fixed-reference RBE” and “dose-rate
                                   adapted RBE” from here on. The fixed-reference RBE is meant to represent the situation in
                                   most RBE studies and measurements, where the dose rate of the reference radiation is often
                                   a constant value. Here, a value of 2 Gy/min for the dose rate of the reference radiation was
                                   chosen as a representative value. On the other hand, the dose-rate adapted RBE shows
                                   the “intrinsic” efficacy of the protons in comparison to the reference radiation for a certain
                                   cell-line at the same dose rate for protons and photons. As a reference, the proton RBE
                                   prediction, which disregards any DNA repair kinetics and applied dose rates for both the
                                   reference radiation and the proton beam, is shown as well (solid blue line) and will be
                                   referred to as “no-repair RBE”. (For an overview of the RBE definitions please refer to
                                   Section 5.4). For demonstration purposes, the model parameters were set to represent the
                                   DU145 cell-line line as obtained from Adrian et al. [25] and El-Awady et al. [26], which has
                                   been used in a similar analysis in one of our previous publications [8] (Table 1). The fixed-
                                   reference RBE (green dashed line) is found to initially increase and then saturate towards
                                   high dose rates. The trend slightly weakens with increasing LET. On the contrary, the
                                   dose-rate adapted RBE (orange dotted line) initially decreases before saturating at a lower
                                   level, which is identical to the no-repair RBE (sold blue line). For the dose-rate adapted
                                   RBE, the trend is more pronounced for the higher LET settings. For both definitions, the
                                   range of RBE covered within the studied dose-rate ranges visibly increases with the applied
                                   dose. The same general trends of the fixed-reference and dose-rate adapted RBE were
                                   found for helium ions (see Supplementary Material Figure S1).




                                   Figure 1. Proton RBE predictions for the DU145 cell-line over the applied dose rate for the fixed-
                                   reference RBE (2 Gy/min; green dashed line) as well as the dose-rate adapted RBE (dotted orange
                                   line) by using the extended version of the UNIVERSE for three representative LET values at moderate
                                   doses. The no-repair RBE is shown for reference (solid blue line).
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022, 23, 6268                                                                                                   4 of 18




                                    Figure 2. Proton RBE predictions for the DU145 cell-line over the applied dose rate for the fixed-
                                    reference RBE (2 Gy/min; green dashed line) as well as the dose-rate adapted RBE (dotted orange
                                    line) by using the extended version of the UNIVERSE for three representative LET values at higher
                                    doses. The no-repair RBE is shown for reference (solid blue line).

                                    Table 1. Endpoint dependent UNIVERSE parameters applied in this work.

          Endpoint                   KiDSB                KcDSB               T1/2
                                                                               iDSB [min]         T1/2
                                                                                                   cDSB [min]          Reference
         DU145                     5.9 × 10−3              0.17                    4                   100               [25,26]
     Rat Spinal Cord
   (considering repair             3.5 × 10−5           9.8 × 10−3               11.4                 129.6              [27–29]
  during parameter fit)
     Rat Spinal Cord
    (neglecting repair             6.5 × 10−3           8.5 × 10−3                 -                    -                [27,28]
  during parameter fit)


                                         In order to further examine the possible discrepancy between the no-repair RBE (blue
                                    solid line) and fixed-reference RBE for the representative setup above, the relative difference
                                    between the two predictions for each presented setting are shown in Table 2. The relative
                                    difference between the predicted RBE values appear to generally increase over both dose
                                    and LET.

                                    Table 2. Maximum relative difference between fixed-reference RBE and no-repair RBE for the analysis
                                    shown in Figures 1 and 2. The maximum relative difference was determined at the highest dose rate
                                    analyzed (saturation value).

                                                Dose                 2 keV/µm               8 keV/µm                 25 keV/µm
                                                2 Gy                  1.3%                    1.8%                     3.5%
                                                6 Gy                  6.2%                    5.1%                     9.9%
                                                12 Gy                 12.9%                   16.6%                    22.2%
                                                24 Gy                 34.1%                   36.8%                    45.4%


                                         To illustrate the potential impact of the dose rate applied by the reference radiation on
                                    the predicted RBE, the fixed-reference RBE is plotted using two representative reference
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022, 23, 6268                                                                                               5 of 18




                                   dose rates at the setting of 6 Gy and 8 keV/µm (values chosen for demonstrative purposes),
                                   as shown in the left panel of Figure 3. Shifting the dose rate of the reference radiation
                                   from 2 Gy/min to 1 Gy/min resulted in an increase of 8.3% in the predicted maximum
                                   RBE at the applied settings. Similarly, the proton RBE was recalculated using a longer
                                                                                                1/2
                                   representative repair half-life time for isolated damages TiDSB   of 30 min to showcase the
                                   effect of this parameter on model predictions (right panel Figure 3). The dose-rate effect is
                                   visibly reduced when the longer repair half-life time is applied. The maximum value of the
                                   fixed reference RBE decreased by 4.2% and its maximum deviation from the no-repair RBE
                                   decreased from 5.5% to 0.6%.




                                   Figure 3. Proton RBE predictions for the DU145 cell-line over the applied dose rate for the fixed-
                                   reference RBE (2 Gy/min; green dashed line) as well as the dose-rate adapted RBE (dotted orange
                                   line) at 6 Gy and 8 kev/µm. The predicted no-repair RBE is shown for reference (solid lines). Left
                                   panel: An additional prediction for the same cell-line is shown, calculated based on a reference
                                   radiation source with a reduced fixed dose rate (1 Gy/min). Right panel: Additional predictions are
                                                                                        1/2
                                   shown for the same cell-line but a larger value for TiDSB (=30 min).

                                         As the effects of the applied dose rate on the RBE are progressively pronounced with
                                   an increasing dose, we examined whether the predictions of the modified UNIVERSE are
                                   consistent with the experimental data obtained using proton and helium beams applying
                                   high doses with distinct dose rates from those applied by the reference radiation. For
                                   this purpose, the rat spinal cord (RSC) studies by Saager et al. [23] and Hintz et al. [24]
                                   were used. These studies measured the RBE based on the TD50 -values (dose at 50% effect
                                   probability) for the clinical endpoint of paresis grade II that was detected within 300 days.
                                   The spinal cord was positioned at different depths within a proton and helium spread-
                                   out Bragg peak (SOBP), and either one or two fractions of high doses (up to ~20 Gy)
                                   were applied. The endpoint dependent model parameters for this study were derived as
                                   KiDSB = 3.5 × 10−5 and KcDSB = 9.8 × 10−3 via best-fitting (method of least squares) to the
                                   reference TD50 photon measurements at a fixed dose rate of 3.75 Gy/min over the number
                                   of fractions obtained by Debus et al. [27] and Karger et al. [28] who used the same endpoint
                                   (see Supplementary Material Figure S2). The repair half-life times of isolated and clustered
                                                                     1/2       1/2
                                   damages within UNIVERSE, TiDSB        and TcDSB   , were set to 11.4 and 129.6 min, respectively,
                                   by following the findings of Pop et al. [29] (Table 1). In an effort to avoid the exceptionally
                                   high computational costs connected with the full calculation of biological effects of an ion
                                   beam containing mixed LET and dose rates, the following approximative approach was
                                   applied to compare the predictions of the dose-rate effects in UNIVERSE with the measured
                                   RBE by Saager et al. [23] and Hintz et al. [24]. In their study, the RBE was determined as the
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022, 23, 6268                                                                                                    6 of 18




                                   ratio between the reference photon TD50 at 3.75 Gy/min and the TD50 at a given position
                                                                       .
                                   within the SOBP receiving dose-rate D:
                                                                                        
                                                                              γ       Gy
                                                                          TD50 3.75 min
                                                                  RBE =           p .
                                                                                           .                            (1)
                                                                              TD50 ( D )

                                        However, this expression can be extended to:
                                                                                                             
                                                                                    .             γ       Gy
                                                                               γ
                                                                           TD50 ( D )           TD50 3.75 min
                                                                 RBE =         p    .       ·         γ   .       ,                    (2)
                                                                           TD50 ( D )              TD50 ( D )

                                   where the superscripts γ and p signify the application of photons and (charged) particles,
                                   respectively. The first fraction in Equation (2) equals the definition of the dose-rate adapted
                                   RBE and the second fraction in Equation (2) describes the relative effectiveness between
                                   the reference radiation at the reference dose rate and the dose-rate applied by the ion beam.
                                                                                      γ                      γ .
                                   The latter will be referred to as R TD50 : = TD50 (3.75 Gy/min)/TD50 ( D ), a value which
                                   can be efficiently calculated using the existing dose-rate implementation of UNIVERSE for
                                   sparsely ionizing radiation [8] and is depicted over the dose rate in the left panel of Figure 4.
                                   While the determination of a mixed field dose-rate adapted RBE remains computationally
                                   expensive, the value was found to be well approximated by the no-repair RBE for the dose
                                   rates and LET at the investigated positions. Predictions for the no-repair RBE value can
                                   also be swiftly calculated for mixed LET fields within our existing modelling framework
                                   using pre-processed databases [9]. Taken together, the prediction of the measured dose-rate
                                   dependent RBE within the given setup is approximated using the no-repair RBE multiplied
                                   by the factor, R TD50 —and is shown in the middle and right panel of Figure 4 (solid lines):

                                                                                   TD50 (∞)
                                                                                        γ
                                                                       RBE ≈            p         · R TD50 .                           (3)
                                                                                   TD50 (∞)




                                   Figure 4. Left panel: The ratio between the TD50 after photon irradiation with a reference dose rate of
                                   3.75 Gy/min and a given dose rate (R TD50 ) as a function of the dose rate for one fraction (black line)
                                   and two fractions (dashed purple line). Middle panel and right panel: RBE for TD50 of the rat spinal
                                   cord tolerance after application of a proton SOBP (blue squares; taken from Saager et al. [23]) and a
                                   helium SOBP (red circles; taken from Hintz et al. [24]) in one and two fractions with corresponding
                                   UNIVERSE predictions (solid lines).

                                       The calculated dose rate, the corresponding values of R TD50 , and the simulated dose-
                                   weighted LET (LETd ) for each measurement position of the proton and helium SOBP and
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022, 23, 6268                                                                                             7 of 18




                                   fractionation scheme in the studies by Saager et al. [23] and Hintz et al. [24] are shown in
                                   Table 3.

                                   Table 3. Calculated dose rate, corresponding values of R TD50 , and simulated dose-weighted LET
                                   (LETd ) for each measurement position of the proton and helium SOBP and fractionation scheme in
                                   the studies of Saager et al. [23] and Hintz et al. [24].

                                     Particle (No. of       Depth            Dose-Rate
                                                                                                  RTD50         LETd [keV/µm]
                                       Fractions)           [mm]             [Gy/min]
                                                              35                 11                1.042               2.0
                                          Proton             100                 18                1.051               3.0
                                       (1 Fraction)          120                 42                1.059               4.1
                                                             127                 53                1.061               5.3
                                                              35                  8                1.022               2.0
                                         Proton              100                 14                1.031               3.0
                                      (2 Fractions)          120                 31                1.038               4.1
                                                             127                 41                1.040               5.3
                                                              35                 11                1.042               4.2
                                         Helium              100                 11                1.042               9.3
                                       (1 Fraction)          120                 10                1.041              14.4
                                                             127                  9                1.036              22.0
                                                              35                 8                 1.022               4.2
                                         Helium              100                 7                 1.018               9.3
                                      (2 Fractions)          120                 7                 1.018              14.4
                                                             127                 6                 1.015              22.0


                                        To visualize the deviations between the predicted and measured RBE, the difference
                                   between the two values is shown in Figure 5 for each measurement position and frac-
                                   tionation for the proton as well as helium SOBP (filled blue squares and red circles). The
                                   mean absolute deviations (MAD: the absolute value of the percentage difference between
                                   measured and predicted RBE averaged over the values of one particle) for the proton and
                                   helium predictions were found to be 3.65% and 3.30%, respectively. As a comparison, the
                                   predictions based on the previous version of UNIVERSE as well as the existing clinical
                                   approaches are additionally shown. In its previous version, the UNIVERSE prediction
                                   would neglect the dose rates applied by the reference radiation and the ion beam and
                                   parameters would be derived from reference irradiation data without consideration of
                                   its dose rate and its impact on repair processes. Here, they were derived from the same
                                   reference TD50 photon measurements as were used earlier (obtained at 3.75 Gy/min) but
                                   by applying no DNA damage repair kinetics. Best-fitting (method of least squares; see
                                   Supplementary Material Figure S2) yielded KiDSB = 6.3 × 10−5 and KcDSB = 8.5 × 10−3
                                   (Table 1). Based on these parameters, the RBE predictions were then calculated using
                                   UNIVERSE, again without consideration of the DNA repair kinetics (open blue squares and
                                   red circles). The MADs for this approach were found to be 7.42% and 5.69% for protons and
                                   helium ions, respectively. Representing the current clinical approaches, an RBE value of 1.1
                                   was assumed for the entire proton SOBP and the predictions of the mMKM were computed
                                   using the settings applied by Hintz et al. [24] for the helium SOBP (green diamonds). The
                                   dose-rate effects were not considered in their study. The MADs of the clinical approaches
                                   for protons and helium ions were found to be 6.27% and 8.68%, respectively. In comparison
                                   to the clinical approaches, the previous version of UNIVERSE scored an 18% larger MAD
                                   for protons and 35% smaller MAD for helium ions. The MADs of the modified version
                                   of UNIVERSE were reduced by 51% and 42% for protons and helium ions, respectively,
                                   in comparison to the previous version of the model. At the same time, the MADs of the
                                   modified UNIVERSE were 42% and 62% smaller than the MADs of the clinical approach
                                   for protons and helium ions, respectively.
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022, 23, 6268                                                                                               8 of 18




                                   Figure 5. Difference between predicted RBE of TD50 within the rat spinal cord after application
                                   of a proton SOBP (upper panels; Saager et al. [23]) and a helium SOBP (lower panels; taken from
                                   Hintz et al. [24]) in one (left column) and two fractions (right column) and different predictions.
                                   UNIVERSE considering (closed blue squares and red circles) and disregarding dose-rate/DNA
                                   damage repair (open blue squares and red circles) as well as a fixed RBE of 1.1 for protons and
                                   mMKM predictions for helium ions, representing current clinical approaches (green diamonds).
                                   Positions 1, 2, 3, and 4 correspond to the depth at 35, 100, 120, and 127 mm, respectively.

                                   3. Discussion
                                        The observed increase of the fixed-reference RBE with an increasing dose rate and its
                                   saturation (Figures 1 and 2) can be readily explained by the fact that with an increasing
                                   dose –rate, the irradiation times become gradually shorter in comparison to the repair
                                                                                                                1/2
                                   half-life times of the isolated damages (in our representative analysis: TiDSB    = 4 min). This
                                   reduces the amount of damage being repaired during irradiation, which in turn increases
                                   the lethality of the induced damage pattern. Once the irradiation time is significantly
                                   shorter than the repair half-life time, the effect saturates and a further shortening of the
                                   irradiation time (i.e., increased dose-rate) has no further effect. Within the dose-rate ranges
                                   analyzed in this study, the repair of complex damages plays no significant role as their
                                                                                                            1/2
                                   repair half-life time is often in the order of hours (in our analysis TcDSB    = 100 min). This
                                   can also explain the slight weakening of the rising trend of the fixed-reference RBE over the
                                   dose rate with an increasing LET. At a higher LET, more complex damages are induced
                                   and the effectiveness of the ion beam becomes less sensitive to a change in the irradiation
                                   time and dose rate. At the same time, even the low LET protons in this study (2 keV/µm)
                                   induce slightly higher proportions of complex damages in comparison to the sparsely
                                   ionizing reference radiation. Thus, the gain in lethality over the dose rate for the reference
                                   radiation is higher than for any of the investigated proton settings, resulting in the observed
                                   downward trend of the dose-rate adapted RBE over the dose rate. This effect increases with
                                   the difference of the sensitivity to changes in the dose rate between the reference radiation
                                   and the ion beam, thereby explaining the greater effect at a higher proton LET—where
                                   more complex damages are induced.
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022, 23, 6268                                                                                            9 of 18




                                         The predicted saturation of the biological effect at irradiation timesthat are much
                                   shorter than the repair half-life times is consistent with the sparse experimental data
                                   available in the literature. Matsuura et al. [12] compared the survival of HSG cells at
                                   the plateau (LETd : 0.56 keV/µm) and the Bragg peak (LETd : 3.19 keV/µm) of a proton
                                   beam up to doses of 8 Gy using a conventional dose rate of 8 Gy/min and an increased
                                   dose rate of 325 Gy/min, thereby resulting in a maximum irradiation time of 1 min in
                                   their study. No significant difference was observed between the survival curves obtained
                                   under the two dose-rate settings. Furthermore, Schmid et al. [13] irradiated HeLa cells
                                   using a 20MeV proton beam (LET: 2.66 keV/µm) by applying 3 Gy within 100 ms to
                                   1 ns, finding no significant change in the effectiveness of micronuclei production. In
                                   both studies, the applied irradiation times were clearly shorter than the typical values of
                                   the repair half-life times for isolated damages found in the literature [8,30–32], meaning
                                   that no differences in RBE would be expected in the given settings. On the other hand,
                                   while Bennett et al. [11] applied relatively low doses that are comparable to those in the
                                   previously mentioned studies (up to 3 Gy), they observed a decrease in proton RBE at all
                                   investigated LET (0.22, 0.74 and 1.26 keV/µm) when the dose rate was reduced. However,
                                   the dose-rates applied for this comparison were 0.33 Gy/min and 0.0165 Gy/min, resulting
                                   in a maximum irradiation time of 9 min and 3 h, respectively. Especially at the lower
                                   dose rate, the irradiation time significantly exceeds common values for the repair half-life
                                   time of isolated damages, even reaching common values for complex damages [8,30–32]
                                   so that significant sensitivity to the changes in the dose rate would be expected. This
                                   behavior is also in line with the trends predicted by other biophysical models with a focus
                                   on clinical applications, such as the recently published study by Kasamatsu et al. [22],
                                   which implies that for significant protractions of the irradiation (i.e., very low dose-rate),
                                   a considerable dose-rate effect could even arise at lower clinical doses (~2 Gy). Besides
                                   the increasing steepness of the RBE-dose-rate dependency towards a lower dose rate,
                                   the growing importance of the dose-rate effect with the applied dose predicted by other
                                   models [17–20] is consistently reflected in our predictions. The range of predicted RBE
                                   covered throughout the studied dose-rate range, and concurrently the steepness of the fall
                                   off towards low dose rates, visibly increases for both definitions of RBE with the applied
                                   dose within our framework (Figures 1 and 2).
                                         Similarly, the discrepancy between the no-repair RBE and the fixed-reference RBE was
                                   found to increase with the applied dose and reach significant levels at doses of about 6 Gy
                                   and above for the settings chosen in our study (Table 2). The trend can be explained by the
                                   following mathematical argument: The fixed-reference RBE is defined as the ratio between
                                                                                                                               .
                                   the dose applied by the reference radiation (γ) with a (commonly low) fixed dose-rate δ
                                                   .                      .
                                                                       γ
                                   (in our study δ = 2 Gy/min), DEL (δ) and the dose applied by the particle beam (p) at a
                                                     .   p   .                                                 .    p   .
                                                                                                           γ
                                   given dose-rate D, DEL ( D ), that leads to the same effect level EL: DEL (δ)/DEL ( D ). The
                                   maximum (or saturation) value of this RBE definition can be found at the limit of high dose
                                                                         .     p
                                   –rates, which can be written as: DEL (δ)/DEL (∞). The no-repair RBE can be interpreted as
                                                                      γ

                                   the same ratio with both doses being applied at infinite dose rates, where repair becomes
                                                          p
                                   negligible: DEL (∞)/DEL (∞). Therefore, the maximum ratio between the RBE predicted
                                                 γ
                                                                                   .
                                   by both implementations is given by: DEL (δ)/DEL (∞). This again is the definition of
                                                                               γ           γ

                                   the RBE of the reference radiation applied with the infinite dose rate in reference to the
                                   same radiation quality applied at a low, fixed dose rate. In our approximative approach to
                                   efficiently predict the RBE measurements in the RSC, this factor was termed RTD50 . It can
                                   be shown that within the linear–quadratic model (LQM) [33], the RBE decreases with an
                                   increasing dose if and only if [34]:
                                                                                   s
                                                                           α∞          β∞
                                                                               >            ,                                  (4)
                                                                           αδ.         β δ.
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022, 23, 6268                                                                                           10 of 18




                                   where αδ. and β δ. , as well as α∞ and β ∞ , are the linear and quadratic coefficient of the
                                   survival curves resulting from an irradiation with the reference dose rate at the fixed dose
                                         .
                                   rate δ as well as the “infinite” dose rate, respectively. Now, it is well established that
                                   survival curves of sparsely ionizing radiation exhibit an increasingly linear behavior with
                                   decreasing dose rates [35–37], while the value of α remains nearly constant [38]. This means
                                   the value of β approaches zero for very low dose rates. In the context of our framework,
                                   this can be explained by the effective suppression of cDSB through significant repair during
                                   the longer irradiation times. (For illustration purposes, the predicted survival curves of
                                   DU145 cells after irradiation with sparsely ionizing radiation at 2 Gy/min and with an
                                   “infinite” dose rate are shown in the Supplementary Material). Consequently, the left side
                                   of Inequality 4 assumes a value of about one, while the right side easily exceeds this value
                                   with β δ. being significantly smaller than β ∞ , thereby implying the reverse of the inequality
                                                                    .
                                   to be true. Thus, the ratio DEL (δ)/DEL (∞), and therefore, the relative difference between
                                                                γ        γ

                                   the no-repair RBE and fixed-reference RBE, increases with the applied dose. The general
                                   increase of this discrepancy with LET found in our study can also be understood in this
                                   context. The discussed dose increase is equivalent to increasing the effect level at which the
                                   two dose rates of the reference radiation are compared to each other. Within the LET range
                                   investigated in this study, proton and helium beams generally become more effective with
                                   increasing LET, thus leading to a “dose-equivalent” shift of the assessed effect level.
                                        With both our study and the literature pointing towards increased dose-rate effects at
                                   high doses, the RBE studies based on rat spinal cords irradiated with high dose proton and
                                   helium SOBPs (fractional doses of up to ~20 Gy) by Saager et al. [23] and Hintz et al. [24]
                                   appeared to be prime candidates to benchmark our extended model. While biophysical
                                   models based on DNA lesions and cell survival might not be necessarily extendable to
                                   a model of late tissue toxicity (or any higher level biological endpoint) in a simple and
                                   conclusive way, it has become common and accepted practice to extend their prediction
                                   by generalizing the meaning of the radiosensitivity parameters to establish the dose-
                                   effect relationship and applying the existing framework [23,24,39–42]. In UNIVERSE,
                                   this approach could be motivated by viewing the DNA damage pattern characterized by
                                   the amount of isolated and complex DSB as a proxy for the general effect of the applied
                                   radiation and coupling it to the investigated endpoint by reinterpreting the parameters
                                   KiDSB and KcDSB as probabilities for each of the damage instances to trigger the endpoint
                                   of interest. The found values for KiDSB and KcDSB for the in-vivo study are about two
                                   orders of magnitude smaller than those used in the in-vitro analysis (Table 1), following a
                                   trend already found in an earlier publication [8]. In a study applying the latest version of
                                   the “local effect model” (LEM) [41], the authors reduced their radiosensitivity parameters,
                                   which coincide with the LQM parameters α and β, by about two orders of magnitude
                                   from the values applied for in-vitro predictions for their description of in-vivo endpoints.
                                   As a reason for this approach, the authors refer to “ . . . recent findings concerning the
                                   observed difference of the absolute LQ-parameters between in-vitro and in-vivo endpoints
                                   independent on the tumor type . . . ” [41]. Under given assumptions, the values of KiDSB
                                   and KcDSB can be approximated by a linear combination of the LQM parameters [43,44]
                                   so that such observations are probably applicable to the UNIVERSE parameters, too.
                                   Mechanistically, the lower values of KiDSB and KcDSB could signify the extended effect
                                   chain that might lie between the damage pattern within a single cell and the higher-level
                                   endpoints that are observed in in-vivo studies. Instead of merely triggering the loss of one
                                   colony, a larger number of damaged cells might have to be involved, while at the same
                                   time there are potentially several additional steps involved that may need to be taken until
                                   the observed endpoint develops. The predictions of the modified UNIVERSE match the
                                   trend and values of the data well (middle and right panel Figure 4) and the deviations
                                   from the measurements are small (Figure 5). It is noteworthy that there appears to be a
                                   significant upward dose-rate gradient within the proton SOBP, while the dose rate within
                                   the helium SOBP appears to slightly taper off towards the distal edge (Table 3). This can be
                                   explained by the fact that the irradiation field is delivered in subsequent “energy slices”
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022, 23, 6268                                                                                            11 of 18




                                   in depth. The dose at the proximal positions is therefore delivered by virtually all energy
                                   slices, while the dose at the distal positions is built up by only a few energy slices. However,
                                   in the case of the helium beam, a substantial number of secondary particles are formed,
                                   which transport parts of the dose along the beam axis towards the distal edge. Thus, at the
                                   distal positions in the helium SOBP, the total dose is deposited over a longer period of time,
                                   reducing the effective dose rate. Therefore, depending on the irradiation plan and applied
                                   particle, different dose-rate profiles may arise, which might need to be considered for an
                                   accurate prediction of the RBE. Furthermore, knowledge of the impact of such dose-rate
                                   profiles could be important to correctly interpret measured RBE profiles, such as those
                                   obtained in the discussed RSC study. Before the modifications presented in this study were
                                   implemented in UNIVERSE, the predictions of biological dose in ion beams as well as
                                   the model parameters that they were based on were derived with no regard for the dose
                                   rate and DNA repair kinetics. Thus, the predictions by this previous version need to be
                                   differentiated from the “no-repair RBE” introduced earlier, where the model parameters
                                   were derived under the consideration of the dose rate of the reference radiation. The
                                   previous approach within UNIVERSE predicts markedly lower RBE values in comparison
                                   to the modified version of the model (Figure 5), which can be explained by the neglect for
                                   the heightened dose rate within the ion beams in comparison to the reference radiation.
                                   While the clinical assumption of an RBE of 1.1 and the previous UNIVERSE approach
                                   delivered comparable results, the mMKM predictions for the helium SOBP were found to
                                   further deviate from the measured values than the predictions by the former UNIVERSE
                                   version. Ultimately, the predictions from the presented modified version of UNIVERSE
                                   were not only found to be reduced in comparison to its previous version, but also compared
                                   to current clinical approaches. However, the MKM version (mMKM) applied in this study
                                   was designed primarily to accommodate a low dose per fraction irradiation planning,
                                   disregarding any DNA repair kinetics. A more recent extension of the model, including the
                                   repair of sub-lethal damage, could provide improved predictions [17–20].
                                         Consequently, DNA repair kinetics and the dose rates applied by the reference as well
                                   as the ion beam need to be considered for the biophysical models to make precise predic-
                                   tions and allow for the accurate assessment of their benchmarks, as deviations between the
                                   prediction and measurement could be misjudged. In practice, this is especially relevant
                                   for benchmarks with data from translational in-vivo measurements using endpoints such
                                   as paresis after irradiation of the RSC [23,24] (as used in this study) or the regeneration of
                                   crypts in mice jejunum [45], which, by design, are needed to assess large doses. In those
                                   scenarios, high clinical relevance is paired with an increased potential need to correct for
                                   dose-rate effects. Its performance in the benchmark presented has shown the ability for
                                   the modified UNIVERSE to provide improved and adequate predictions in such cases.
                                   On the other hand, while dependent on the model parameters, our study indicated that
                                   substantial deviations between predictions neglecting DNA damage repair (no-repair RBE)
                                   and predictions including such mechanisms (fixed-reference RBE) within our model could
                                   already arise at doses as low as 6 Gy (Table 2), thereby not only concerning the possible
                                   predictions for hypofractionated clinical settings but even higher doses applied in con-
                                   ventional in-vitro measurements. Furthermore, the observed impact of the reference dose
                                   rate on the predicted RBE (Figure 3 left panel) does not only underline its importance
                                   for accurate predictions by UNIVERSE, but also illustrates the possibly significant impact
                                   on the measured RBE. In order to appropriately compare RBE measurements obtained in
                                   different setups, one might therefore need to carefully consider the dose rates applied by
                                   the respective reference radiations.
                                         The approximation applied in this work to predict the measured RBE in the RSC study
                                   enabled a swift calculation and thus avoiding significant computational costs that would
                                   have exceeded the scope of this study. The approximation was valid because the value of
                                   the dose-rate adapted RBE predicted by the modified implementation was nearly identical
                                   to the value predicted by the existing implementation for the dose rates and LET present
                                   at the measurement points of the study. However, it would fail as soon as the two values
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022, 23, 6268                                                                                           12 of 18




                                   diverge, which would mainly be the case at lower dose rates. Thus, the approximation is not
                                   generally applicable, especially in situations including longer irradiation times (e.g., active
                                   scanning of large fields, inter-beam irradiation pauses), which would call for the utilization
                                   of a full simulation. Further developments are planned to optimize the performance of the
                                   model to enable such calculations with UNIVERSE within reasonable computation times.

                                   4. Conclusions
                                        The UNIVERSE model of ion beam RBE was extended to consider the time-dependent
                                   repair of isolated and complex DNA damages and the resulting effects of the dose rates
                                   applied by the reference radiation and the ion beam itself. The predicted trends, including
                                   the increased importance of the dose-rate effect with the applied dose and the saturation of
                                   effects at high dose rates were found to be consistent with measurements and model-based
                                   studies found in the literature. As a benchmark of our developments, clinically relevant
                                   RBE measurements by Saager et al. [23] and Hintz et al. [24] in the rat spinal cord irradiated
                                   with high dose proton and helium SOBP leading to fields of mixed LET and distinct dose-
                                   rate profiles applied in one and two fractions were chosen. The data were matched well
                                   by the prediction of the modified UNIVERSE, outperforming its previous version and
                                   existing clinical approaches, which neglect dose-rate effects. Our study not only shows
                                   that the dose rates applied by the reference as well as the ion beam should be considered
                                   for biophysical models to make precise predictions and allow for the accurate assessment
                                   of their benchmarks, but also showcases an important step in the development of our
                                   framework. UNIVERSE can now better support the correct interpretation of pre-clinical
                                   studies by applying high doses and its capabilities to give theoretical guidance during the
                                   development of novel techniques in ion beam therapy were extended.

                                   5. Materials and Methods
                                   5.1. Experimental Data from Literature
                                        The experimental RBE data used to benchmark the model were taken from [23,24].

                                   5.2. Modeling Approach
                                         The UNIVERSE is a modelling framework developed to describe the effects of ion-
                                   izing radiation in biological systems considering numerous factors, including the effect
                                   of interference with the DNA damage repair process [6,9], radical scavengers [7], and the
                                   applied dose rate [8,10]. For this study, the implementation of DNA repair kinetics and
                                   that of ion beams from two recent publications [8,9] are combined to study the dose-rate
                                   effects in ion beams. For detailed descriptions of the implementation and parameters of
                                   the individual sub-components, we kindly refer to the respective references. Here, a basic
                                   description of the concepts relevant to this study shall be given.
                                         In UNIVERSE, the survival probability of a cell is determined by the amount and
                                   distribution of DNA double strand breaks (DSB). More specifically, the chromatin is sup-
                                   posed to be divided into domains containing about 2 Mbp of DNA, resembling chromatin
                                   substructures referred to as “giant-loops” [46–50]. A domain containing only a single DSB
                                   is classified as an “isolated” DSB (iDSB), while those containing two or more are labeled
                                   as “complex” or “clustered” DSB (cDSB), thereby following the approach of others [43,51].
                                   This classification was found to resemble the populations of quickly and slowly repaired
                                   DSB after irradiation [32,52]. Based on the number of isolated DSB (NiDSB ) and complex
                                   DSB (NcDSB ) within the nucleus, and given the probability that one iDSB or one cDSB
                                   inactivates the cells described by the cell-line dependent lethality parameters KiDSB and
                                   KcDSB , respectively, one can determined the cell survival probability (S) using [6,43]:

                                                            S = (1 − KiDSB ) NiDSB · (1 − KcDSB ) NcDSB .                      (5)

                                        For sparsely ionizing radiation, such as photons and most electron beams, the de-
                                   posited dose is thought to be homogenously spread throughout the cell’s nucleus. With an
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022, 23, 6268                                                                                                  13 of 18




                                   average DSB yield of α DSB = 30 GyDSB  ·Cell [53], which is found to be constant within clinical
                                   dose ranges [54], the expected number of induced DSB after irradiation with a dose D
                                   can be written as h NtDSB i = α DSB · D. The survival fraction within an irradiated cell
                                   population can then be predicted as follows: The induced number of DSB is sampled from
                                   a Poisson distribution based on its expectation value for >104 iterations. For each iteration,
                                   each induced DSB is randomly assigned to a domain within the nucleus with a uniform
                                   probability. Ultimately, the number of domains containing a single DSB (iDSB) and two or
                                   more DSB (cDSB) are scored, and the survival probability is determined using Equation (5).
                                   Finally, these results are averaged over all iterations.
                                        In contrast, for ion beams, the heterogenous dose deposition by single ion traversals
                                   and their radial dose distribution (RDD) needs to be considered in a geometrical represen-
                                   tation of the cell nucleus. In our implementation [9], the nuclear geometry is approximated
                                   by a cylinder containing cubic domains, through which the particles pass parallel to its
                                   height-axis. The RDD of the tracks are described with the Kiefer–Chatterjee parametriza-
                                   tion [55,56] and consists of an inner “core” region with constant dose Dc and a radius of
                                   rmin as well as an outer “penumbra” region covering a radius of rmax and a dose of D p ,
                                   which decreases as a function of the distance to the track center r (here given in µm) [57,58]:
                                                                                                       
                                                                       1       LET                  rmax
                                                            Dc =        2
                                                                                     − 2 π K p ln           ,                   (6)
                                                                    π rmin       ρ                  rmin

                                                                         D p ( r ) = K p r −2 ,                                       (7)
                                                                                         ∗ 2
                                                                                            z
                                                                    K p = 1.25 · 10−4            ,                                    (8)
                                                                                           β ion
                                   where LET is the unrestricted linear energy transfer of the particle in keV/µm, ρ is the
                                   density of water in g/cm3 , β ion = vc (v: particle velocity, c: speed of light), and z∗ is the
                                   effective charge of the particle, given by [59]:
                                                                                                  
                                                                                              −2/3
                                                             z∗ = zion 1 − exp −125 β ion zion         ,                        (9)

                                   with the charge of the fully ionized particle zion . The core radius is dependent on the
                                   velocity of the particle and can be determined by rmin = β ion · rc , where rc was derived
                                   to be 11.6 nm [55,58]. Furthermore, the maximum extent of the RDD (rmax ) increases with
                                   the kinetic energy of the particle Ekin and can be estimated (in µm) as rmax = e · Ekin
                                                                                                                       δ , with

                                   Ekin in units of MeV/u, e = 0.062, and δ = 1.7 [56,58]. The diffusion of radical species
                                   produced within the initial RDD (D (r )) was considered by convolution with a normal
                                   distribution kernel with a standard deviation σ, which characterizes the diffusion length of
                                   the radicals. The resulting diffused RDD ( D e (r )) is then given by [60,61]:

                                                                      −r2 /2σ2 Z ∞                  02
                                                                                                              
                                                                                                                  r r0
                                                                                                                       
                                                         e (r ) = e                  dr 0 r 0 e
                                                                                                  −r2
                                                                                                                         D r0 ,
                                                                                                                             
                                                         D                                         2σ    I0                          (10)
                                                                       σ2      0                                  σ 2


                                   with the modified Bessel function of order zero I0 . To improve the performance of
                                   UNIVERSE simulations on Graphics Processing Units (GPU), the diffused RDD was
                                   parametrized with an approximative three-step function. Based on the assumed radius
                                   of the nucleus and the maximum extension of the penumbra, the area through which a
                                   tracks core needs to pass in order to deposit any dose in the nucleus can be determined.
                                   Using the LET of the particle and the macroscopic planned dose, the expected number of
                                   tracks passing this area is computed. For each iteration, the number of tracks that deposit a
                                   dose in the nucleus is sampled from a Poisson distribution using the previously calculated
                                   expectancy value. These tracks are randomly assigned a position within the aforemen-
                                   tioned area following a uniform distribution. The dose deposited by each track traversal
                                   within each nuclear domain can be computed using this RDD parametrization, thereby
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022, 23, 6268                                                                                           14 of 18




                                   resulting in an expectancy value for an induced DSB in the individual domains, which
                                   are again used to sample the actual amount of DSB in each domain following a Poisson
                                   distribution. The high local doses (>>100 Gy), which can arise within a charged particle
                                   track, are believed to result in the aggregation of DNA single strand breaks on opposite
                                   strands of the DNA, ultimately resulting in the formation of DSB and an increase in the
                                   expected number of DSB within the affected domains. In our implementation, this process
                                   is considered using an analytical formula proposed by Friedrich et al. [62], which effectively
                                   results in an increased yield of DSB with LET. Following the hypothesis that the survival
                                   probability of a cell is only dependent on the induced damage and not the radiation quality
                                   that caused it, the amount of isolated as well as complex DSB and the resulting survival
                                   probability is determined for individual iterations following Equation (5) and using the
                                   same lethality parameters, KiDSB and KcDSB , as for sparsely ionizing radiation. The results
                                   are again averaged over all iterations to yield the prediction for the surviving fraction
                                   of the cell population after irradiation. Thus, the cell-line dependent parameters KiDSB
                                   and KcDSB are usually obtained by fitting the model for sparsely ionizing radiation to the
                                   corresponding data and subsequently used to predict the effect of ion beams.
                                          When the repair kinetics of the induced DSB and the impact of the applied dose rate is
                                   considered within UNIVERSE, the total irradiation time of a simulated setup is divided
                                   into a number of time-steps (Nt = 100). For both sparsely ionizing radiation and ion beams,
                                   the distribution of DSB within the domains is simulated for partial doses D part = D/Nt
                                   and added to the existing DSB distribution at each time step. For each iDSB and cDSB, a
                                   lifetime is randomly sampled from an exponential distribution characterized by a shorter
                                                                         1/2        1/2
                                   and longer repair half-life time, TiDSB    and TcDSB , respectively. These cell-line dependent
                                   values can be adopted from the results of DSB re-joining studies in the literature or are
                                   fitted to data. If at any timestep any DSB is added to a domain classified as an iDSB, it is
                                                                                                                             1/2
                                   transformed into a cDSB and the lifetime of this damage is redrawn on the basis of TcDSB      .
                                   At each timestep, the sampled lifetimes of the DSB are checked and any damage exceeding
                                   its lifetime is repaired (i.e., removed from the domain). Each instance of repair however has
                                   a chance to fail with the probability of KiDSB and KcDSB for iDSB and cDSB, respectively.
                                   In case of such a “misrepair” event, the cell is believed to be inactivated and its survival
                                   probability is defined as zero, through which the consistency of the algorithm is ensured
                                   when repair processes are considered over different periods of time. For each iteration, the
                                   survival probability is again calculated using Equation (5) at the end of the irradiation time.
                                   If no misrepair event occurred, the average value of all iterations is used as the survival
                                   fraction after irradiation with a given dose rate.

                                   5.3. RBE Definitions
                                        The fixed-reference RBE is defined as the ratio between the dose applied by the
                                                                                                 .
                                   reference radiation (γ) with a (commonly low) fixed dose rate δ (in our representative study
                                   .                       .
                                                       γ
                                   δ = 2 Gy/min), DEL (δ), and the dose applied by the particle beam (p) at a given dose rate
                                   .    p   .
                                   D, DEL ( D ) leads to the same effect level EL:
                                                                                                .       p       .
                                                                                        γ
                                                            Fixed-Reference RBE = DEL (δ)/DEL ( D ).                          (11)

                                       In most RBE studies and measurements, the dose rate of the reference radiation is a
                                   constant value.
                                       In the case of the dose-rate adapted RBE, the dose rate of the reference radiation is
                                                            .
                                   adapted to the dose rate D applied by the particle beam so that its definition reads:
                                                                                            γ       .       p       .
                                                          Dose-Rate Adapted RBE = DEL ( D )/DEL ( D ).                        (12)

                                       This definition is an approach to describe the “intrinsic” efficacy of the applied ion
                                   beam in comparison to the reference radiation for a certain cell-line at a given dose rate.
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022, 23, 6268                                                                                                          15 of 18




                                         As the irradiation time approaches zero for extremely high dose rates, the RBE, under
                                    the assumption of no repair taking place, can also be seen as the RBE that is expected if
                                    both the reference radiation and the ion beam were to be applied at infinite dose rates:
                                                                                                         p
                                                                   No-Repair RBE = DEL (∞)/DEL (∞).
                                                                                              γ
                                                                                                                                             (13)

                                    5.4. Monte Carlo Simulation of Dose, Dose-Rate, and Rat Spinal Cord RBE in Spread-Out
                                    Bragg Peak
                                         The 6 cm deep proton and helium SOBPs centered at 10 cm depth applied by
                                    Saager et al. [23] and Hintz et al. [24] were computed via the FLUKA Monte Carlo simu-
                                    lation [63,64] using beam delivery records and log-files. For this, a complete geometry of
                                    the HIT beamline was used [65]. The physical dose, biological dose, and dose rate were
                                    simulated for the four experimental positions: 35 mm, 100 mm, 120 mm, and 127 mm. The
                                    biological dose was calculated using approaches detailed elsewhere [9,66], including the
                                    contributions of secondary particles. The proton (helium) irradiation plan consisted of 29
                                    (31) energy slices separated by ~3.5 s spill-to-spill time with a nominal spill intensity of
                                    3.2 × 109 (8 × 108 ) particle/s. In order to calculate the mean dose rate at each measurement
                                    depth, the total time needed to deliver each TD50 dose at four depths were stored during
                                    the simulation. Then, for each depth, the mean dose rate was calculated as the TD50 dose
                                    divided by this time.

                                    Supplementary Materials: The following supporting information can be downloaded at: https:
                                    //www.mdpi.com/article/10.3390/ijms23116268/s1.
                                    Author Contributions: Conceptualization, H.L. and A.M.; methodology, H.L. and A.M.; software,
                                    H.L. and A.M.; formal analysis, H.L. and A.M.; investigation, A.M., S.M., T.T., I.D. and H.L.; resources,
                                    A.A. and J.D.; data curation, H.L., A.M.; writing—original draft preparation, H.L. and A.M.; writing—
                                    review and editing, H.L., S.M., T.T., C.P.K., A.A., J.D., I.D. and A.M.; visualization, H.L. and A.M.;
                                    supervision, A.M.; project administration, A.A. and J.D.; funding acquisition, A.A. and J.D. All
                                    authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
                                    Funding: This work was supported by the National Center for Tumor Diseases (NCT 3.0-2015.22
                                    BioDose) and by the German Cancer Aid (111434 and 70112975), as well as a PhD stipend from the
                                    Helmholtz International Graduate School for Cancer Research in Heidelberg to H.L.
                                    Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
                                    Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
                                    Data Availability Statement: Not applicable.
                                    Acknowledgments: We thank S. Brons for useful discussions about the in vivo experiments.
                                    Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

References
1.    Giovannini, G.; Böhlen, T.; Cabal, G.; Bauer, J.; Tessonnier, T.; Frey, K.; Debus, J.; Mairani, A.; Parodi, K. Variable RBE in proton
      therapy: Comparison of different model predictions and their influence on clinical-like scenarios. Radiat. Oncol. 2016, 11, 68.
      [CrossRef]
2.    Paganetti, H.; Blakely, E.; Carabe-Fernandez, A.; Carlson, D.J.; Das, I.J.; Dong, L.; Grosshans, D.; Held, K.D.; Mohan, R.; Moiseenko,
      V.; et al. Report of the AAPM TG-256 on the relative biological effectiveness of proton beams in radiation therapy. Med. Phys.
      2019, 46, e53–e78. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
3.    Inaniwa, T.; Furukawa, T.; Kase, Y.; Matsufuji, N.; Toshito, T.; Matsumoto, Y.; Furusawa, Y.; Noda, K. Treatment planning for a
      scanned carbon beam with a modified microdosimetric kinetic model. Phys. Med. Biol. 2010, 55, 6721–6737. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
4.    Mairani, A.; Magro, G.; Tessonnier, T.; Böhlen, T.T.; Molinelli, S.; Ferrari, A.; Parodi, K.; Debus, J.; Haberer, T. Optimizing the
      modified microdosimetric kinetic model input parameters for proton and4He ion beam therapy application. Phys. Med. Biol.
      2017, 62, N244–N256. [CrossRef]
5.    Mein, S.; Dokic, I.; Klein, C.; Tessonnier, T.; Böhlen, T.T.; Magro, G.; Bauer, J.; Ferrari, A.; Parodi, K.; Haberer, T.; et al. Biophysical
      modeling and experimental validation of relative biological effectiveness (RBE) for 4He ion beam therapy. Radiat. Oncol. 2019,
      14, 123. [CrossRef]
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022, 23, 6268                                                                                                      16 of 18




6.    Liew, H.; Klein, C.; Zenke, F.T.; Abdollahi, A.; Debus, J.; Dokic, I.; Mairani, A. Modeling the Effect of Hypoxia and DNA Repair
      Inhibition on Cell Survival after Photon Irradiation. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2019, 20, 6054. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
7.    Liew, H.; Mein, S.; Debus, J.; Dokic, I.; Mairani, A. Modeling Direct and Indirect Action on Cell Survival after Photon Irradiation
      under Normoxia and Hypoxia. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020, 21, 3471. [CrossRef]
8.    Liew, H.; Mein, S.; Dokic, I.; Haberer, T.; Debus, J.; Abdollahi, A.; Mairani, A. Deciphering time-dependent DNA damage
      complexity, repair and oxygen tension: A mechanistic model for FLASH-dose-rate radiotherapy. Int. J. Radiat. Oncol. 2021, 110,
      574–586. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
9.    Liew, H.; Meister, S.; Mein, S.; Tessonnier, T.; Kopp, B.; Held, T.; Haberer, T.; Abdollahi, A.; Debus, J.; Dokic, I.; et al. Combined
      DNA Damage Repair Interference and Ion Beam Therapy: Development, Benchmark, and Clinical Implications of a Mechanistic
      Biological Model. Int. J. Radiat. Oncol. 2021, 112, 802–817. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
10.   Liew, H.; Mein, S.; Tessonnier, T.; Abdollahi, A.; Debus, J.; Dokic, I.; Mairani, A. The Impact of Sub-Millisecond Damage Fixation
      Kinetics on the In Vitro Sparing Effect at Ultra-High Dose Rate in UNIVERSE. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022, 23, 2954. [CrossRef]
11.   Bennett, P.V.; Johnson, A.M.; Ackerman, S.E.; Chaudhary, P.; Keszenman, D.J.; Wilson, P.F. Dose-Rate Effects of Protons and Light
      Ions for DNA Damage Induction, Survival and Transformation in Apparently Normal Primary Human Fibroblasts. Radiat. Res.
      2021, 197, 298–313. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
12.   Matsuura, T.; Egashira, Y.; Nishio, T.; Matsumoto, Y.; Wada, M.; Koike, S.; Furusawa, Y.; Kohno, R.; Nishioka, S.; Kameoka, S.;
      et al. Apparent absence of a proton beam dose rate effect and possible differences in RBE between Bragg peak and plateau. Med.
      Phys. 2010, 37, 5376–5381. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
13.   Schmid, T.E.; Dollinger, G.; Hauptner, A.; Hable, V.; Greubel, C.; Auer, S.; Friedl, A.A.; Molls, M.; Röper, B. No Evidence for a
      Different RBE between Pulsed and Continuous 20 MeV Protons. Rare 2009, 172, 567–574. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
14.   Schmid, T.E.; Dollinger, G.; Hable, V.; Greubel, C.; Zlobinskaya, O.; Michalski, D.; Molls, M.; Röper, B. Relative biological
      effectiveness of pulsed and continuous 20 MeV protons for micronucleus induction in 3D human reconstructed skin tissue.
      Radiother. Oncol. 2010, 95, 66–72. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
15.   Zlobinskaya, O.; Siebenwirth, C.; Greubel, C.; Hable, V.; Hertenberger, R.; Humble, N.; Reinhardt, S.; Michalski, D.; Röper, B.;
      Multhoff, G.; et al. The Effects of Ultra-High Dose Rate Proton Irradiation on Growth Delay in the Treatment of Human Tumor
      Xenografts in Nude Mice. Rare 2014, 181, 177–183. [CrossRef]
16.   Joiner, M.; van der Kogel, A. (Eds.) Basic Clinical Radiobiology, 5th ed.; CRC Press; Taylor & Francis Group: Boca Raton, FL, USA,
      2018; ISBN 978-1-4441-7963-7.
17.   Inaniwa, T.; Suzuki, M.; Furukawa, T.; Kase, Y.; Kanematsu, N.; Shirai, T.; Hawkins, R.B. Effects of Dose-Delivery Time Structure
      on Biological Effectiveness for Therapeutic Carbon-Ion Beams Evaluated with Microdosimetric Kinetic Model. Radiat. Res. 2013,
      180, 44–59. [CrossRef]
18.   Inaniwa, T.; Kanematsu, N.; Suzuki, M.; Hawkins, R.B. Effects of beam interruption time on tumor control probability in
      single-fractionated carbon-ion radiotherapy for non-small cell lung cancer. Phys. Med. Biol. 2015, 60, 4105–4121. [CrossRef]
19.   Takei, H.; Inaniwa, T. Effect of Irradiation Time on Biological Effectiveness and Tumor Control Probability in Proton Therapy. Int.
      J. Radiat. Oncol. Biol. Phys. 2019, 105, 222–229. [CrossRef]
20.   Manganaro, L.; Russo, G.; Cirio, R.; Dalmasso, F.; Giordanengo, S.; Monaco, V.; Muraro, S.; Sacchi, R.; Vignati, A.; Attili, A. A
      Monte Carlo approach to the microdosimetric kinetic model to account for dose rate time structure effects in ion beam therapy
      with application in treatment planning simulations. Med. Phys. 2017, 44, 1577–1589. [CrossRef]
21.   Herr, L. Modeling of Time-Dose-LET Effects in the Cellular Response to Radiation. Ph.D. Thesis, Technische Universität,
      Darmstadt, Germany, 2015.
22.   Kasamatsu, K.; Tanaka, S.; Miyazaki, K.; Takao, S.; Miyamoto, N.; Hirayama, S.; Nishioka, K.; Hashimoto, T.; Aoyama, H.;
      Umegaki, K.; et al. Impact of a spatially dependent dose delivery time structure on the biological effectiveness of scanning proton
      therapy. Med. Phys. 2022, 49, 702–713. [CrossRef]
23.   Saager, M.; Peschke, P.; Brons, S.; Debus, J.; Karger, C.P. Determination of the proton RBE in the rat spinal cord: Is there an increase
      towards the end of the spread-out Bragg peak? Radiother. Oncol. 2018, 128, 115–120. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
24.   Hintz, L.; Glowa, C.; Saager, M.; Euler-Lange, R.; Peschke, P.; Brons, S.; Grün, R.; Scholz, M.; Mein, S.; Mairani, A.; et al. Relative
      biological effectiveness of single and split helium ion doses in the rat spinal cord increases strongly with linear energy transfer.
      Radiother. Oncol. 2022, 170, 224–230. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
25.   Adrian, G.; Konradsson, E.; Lempart, M.; Bäck, S.; Ceberg, C.; Petersson, K. The FLASH effect depends on oxygen concentration.
      Br. J. Radiol. 2019, 93, 20190702. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
26.   El-Awady, R.A.; Dikomey, E.; Dahm-Daphi, J. Radiosensitivity of human tumour cells is correlated with the induction but not
      with the repair of DNA double-strand breaks. Br. J. Cancer 2003, 89, 593–601. [CrossRef]
27.   Debus, J.; Scholz, M.; Haberer, T.; Peschke, P.; Jäkel, O.; Karger, C.P.; Wannenmacher, M. Radiation Tolerance of the Rat Spinal
      Cord after Single and Split Doses of Photons and Carbon Ions. Radiat. Res. 2003, 160, 536–542. [CrossRef]
28.   Karger, C.P.; Peschke, P.; Sanchez-Brandelik, R.; Scholz, M.; Debus, J. Radiation tolerance of the rat spinal cord after 6 and 18
      fractions of photons and carbon ions: Experimental results and clinical implications. Int. J. Radiat. Oncol. Biol. Phys. 2006, 66,
      1488–1497. [CrossRef]
29.   Pop, L.A.; Millar, W.T.; van der Plas, M.; van der Kogel, A.J. Radiation tolerance of rat spinal cord to pulsed dose rate (PDR-)
      brachytherapy: The impact of differences in temporal dose distribution. Radiother. Oncol. 2000, 55, 301–315. [CrossRef]
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022, 23, 6268                                                                                                      17 of 18




30.   Herr, L.; Friedrich, T.; Durante, M.; Scholz, M. A Model of Photon Cell Killing Based on the Spatio-Temporal Clustering of DNA
      Damage in Higher Order Chromatin Structures. PLoS ONE 2014, 9, e83923. [CrossRef]
31.   Núñez, M.I.; Villalobos, M.; Olea, N.; Valenzuela, M.T.; Pedraza, V.; McMillan, T.J.; Ruiz de Almodóvar, J.M. Radiation-induced
      DNA double-strand break rejoining in human tumour cells. Br. J. Cancer 1995, 71, 311–316. [CrossRef]
32.   Tommasino, F.; Friedrich, T.; Scholz, U.; Taucher-Scholz, G.; Durante, M.; Scholz, M. A DNA Double-Strand Break Kinetic
      Rejoining Model Based on the Local Effect Model. Rare 2013, 180, 524–538. [CrossRef]
33.   McMahon, S.J. The linear quadratic model: Usage, interpretation and challenges. Phys. Med. Biol. 2018, 64, 01TR01. [CrossRef]
      [PubMed]
34.   Friedrich, T. Proton RBE dependence on dose in the setting of hypofractionation. Br. J. Radiol. 2020, 93, 20190291. [CrossRef]
      [PubMed]
35.   Hall, E.J. Radiation dose-rate: A factor of importance in radiobiology and radiotherapy. Br. J. Radiol. 1972, 45, 81–97. [CrossRef]
      [PubMed]
36.   Steel, G.G.; Down, J.D.; Peacock, J.H.; Stephens, T.C. Dose-rate effects and the repair of radiation damage. Radiother. Oncol. 1986,
      5, 321–331. [CrossRef]
37.   Ruiz de Almodóvar, J.M.; Bush, C.; Peacock, J.H.; Steel, G.G.; Whitaker, S.J.; McMillan, T.J. Dose-rate effect for DNA damage
      induced by ionizing radiation in human tumor cells. Radiat. Res. 1994, 138, S93–S96. [CrossRef]
38.   Stephens, T.C.; Eady, J.J.; Peacock, J.H.; Steel, G.G. Split-dose and low dose-rate recovery in four experimental tumour systems.
      Int. J. Radiat. Biol. Relat. Stud. Phys. Chem. Med. 1987, 52, 157–170. [CrossRef]
39.   Scholz, M.; Friedrich, T.; Magrin, G.; Colautti, P.; Ristić-Fira, A.; Petrović, I. Characterizing Radiation Effectiveness in Ion Beam
      Therapy Part I: Introduction and Biophysical Modeling of RBE Using the LEMIV. Front. Phys. 2020, 8, 272. [CrossRef]
40.   Elsässer, T.; Krämer, M.; Scholz, M. Accuracy of the Local Effect Model for the Prediction of Biologic Effects of Carbon Ion Beams
      In Vitro and In Vivo. Int. J. Radiat. Oncol. 2008, 71, 866–872. [CrossRef]
41.   Grün, R.; Friedrich, T.; Elsässer, T.; Krämer, M.; Zink, K.; Karger, C.P.; Durante, M.; Engenhart-Cabillic, R.; Scholz, M. Impact of
      enhancements in the local effect model (LEM) on the predicted RBE-weighted target dose distribution in carbon ion therapy.
      Phys. Med. Biol. 2012, 57, 7261–7274. [CrossRef]
42.   Carante, M.P.; Aricò, G.; Ferrari, A.; Karger, C.P.; Kozlowska, W.; Mairani, A.; Sala, P.; Ballarini, F. In Vivo Validation of the
      BIANCA Biophysical Model: Benchmarking against Rat Spinal Cord RBE Data. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020, 21, 3973. [CrossRef]
43.   Friedrich, T.; Durante, M.; Scholz, M. Modeling cell survival after photon irradiation based on double-strand break clustering in
      megabase pair chromatin loops. Radiat. Res. 2012, 178, 385–394. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
44.   Mairani, A.; Böhlen, T.T.; Dokic, I.; Cabal, G.; Brons, S.; Haberer, T. Modelling of cell killing due to sparsely ionizing radiation
      in normoxic and hypoxic conditions and an extension to high LET radiation. Int. J. Radiat. Biol. 2013, 89, 782–793. [CrossRef]
      [PubMed]
45.   Grün, R.; Friedrich, T.; Krämer, M.; Scholz, M. Systematics of relative biological effectiveness measurements for proton radiation
      along the spread out Bragg peak: Experimental validation of the local effect model. Phys. Med. Biol. 2017, 62, 890–908. [CrossRef]
      [PubMed]
46.   Sachs, R.K.; van den Engh, G.; Trask, B.; Yokota, H.; Hearst, J.E. A random-walk/giant-loop model for interphase chromosomes.
      Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 1995, 92, 2710–2714. [CrossRef]
47.   Johnston, P.J.; Olive, P.L.; Bryant, P.E. Higher-Order Chromatin Structure-Dependent Repair of DNA Double-Strand Breaks:
      Modeling the Elution of DNA from Nucleoids. Radiat. Res. 1997, 148, 561–567. [CrossRef]
48.   Johnston, P.J.; MacPhail, S.H.; Banáth, J.P.; Olive, P.L. Higher-Order Chromatin Structure-Dependent Repair of DNA Double-
      Strand Breaks: Factors Affecting Elution of DNA from Nucleoids. Radiat. Res. 1998, 149, 533–542. [CrossRef]
49.   Yokota, H.; van den Engh, G.; Hearst, J.E.; Sachs, R.K.; Trask, B.J. Evidence for the organization of chromatin in megabase
      pair-sized loops arranged along a random walk path in the human G0/G1 interphase nucleus. J. Cell Biol. 1995, 130, 1239–1249.
      [CrossRef]
50.   Ostashevsky, J. A Polymer Model for the Structural Organization of Chromatin Loops and Minibands in Interphase Chromosomes.
      Mol. Biol. Cell 1998, 9, 3031–3040. [CrossRef]
51.   Elsässer, T.; Weyrather, W.K.; Friedrich, T.; Durante, M.; Iancu, G.; Krämer, M.; Kragl, G.; Brons, S.; Winter, M.; Weber, K.-J.; et al.
      Quantification of the relative biological effectiveness for ion beam radiotherapy: Direct experimental comparison of proton and
      carbon ion beams and a novel approach for treatment planning. Int. J. Radiat. Oncol. Biol. Phys. 2010, 78, 1177–1183. [CrossRef]
52.   Tommasino, F.; Friedrich, T.; Jakob, B.; Meyer, B.; Durante, M.; Scholz, M. Induction and Processing of the Radiation-Induced
      Gamma-H2AX Signal and Its Link to the Underlying Pattern of DSB: A Combined Experimental and Modelling Study. PLoS ONE
      2015, 10, e0129416. [CrossRef]
53.   Liang, Y.; Fu, Q.; Wang, X.; Liu, F.; Yang, G.; Luo, C.; Ouyang, Q.; Wang, Y. Relative biological effectiveness for photons:
      Implication of complex DNA double-strand breaks as critical lesions. Phys. Med. Biol. 2017, 62, 2153–2175. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
54.   Stewart, R.D.; Yu, V.K.; Georgakilas, A.G.; Koumenis, C.; Park, J.H.; Carlson, D.J. Effects of radiation quality and oxygen on
      clustered DNA lesions and cell death. Radiat. Res. 2011, 176, 587–602. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
55.   Chatterjee, A.; Schaefer, H.J. Microdosimetric structure of heavy ion tracks in tissue. Radiat. Environ. Biophys. 1976, 13, 215–227.
      [CrossRef]
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022, 23, 6268                                                                                                     18 of 18




56.   Kiefer, J.; Straaten, H. A model of ion track structure based on classical collision dynamics. Phys. Med. Biol. 1986, 31, 1201–1209.
      [CrossRef] [PubMed]
57.   Kase, Y.; Kanai, T.; Matsufuji, N.; Furusawa, Y.; Elsässer, T.; Scholz, M. Biophysical calculation of cell survival probabilities using
      amorphous track structure models for heavy-ion irradiation. Phys. Med. Biol. 2008, 53, 37–59. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
58.   Elsässer, T.; Cunrath, R.; Krämer, M.; Scholz, M. Impact of track structure calculations on biological treatment planning in ion
      radiotherapy. New J. Phys. 2008, 10, 075005. [CrossRef]
59.   Barkas, W.H. Nuclear Research Emulsions: Techniques and Theory; Academic Press: Cambridge, MA, USA, 1963.
60.   Elsässer, T.; Scholz, M. Cluster effects within the local effect model. Radiat. Res. 2007, 167, 319–329. [CrossRef]
61.   Brons, S.; Taucher-Scholz, G.; Scholz, M.; Kraft, G. A track structure model for simulation of strand breaks in plasmid DNA after
      heavy ion irradiation. Radiat. Environ. Biophys. 2003, 42, 63–72. [CrossRef]
62.   Friedrich, T.; Durante, M.; Scholz, M. Simulation of DSB yield for high LET radiation. Radiat. Prot. Dosim. 2015, 166, 61–65.
      [CrossRef]
63.   Böhlen, T.T.; Cerutti, F.; Chin, M.P.W.; Fassò, A.; Ferrari, A.; Ortega, P.G.; Mairani, A.; Sala, P.R.; Smirnov, G.; Vlachoudis, V. The
      FLUKA Code: Developments and Challenges for High Energy and Medical Applications. Nucl. Data Sheets 2014, 120, 211–214.
      [CrossRef]
64.   Ferrari, A.; Sala, P.R.; Fassò, A.; Ranft, J. FLUKA: A Multi-Particle Transport Code (Program Version 2005); CERN Yellow Reports:
      Monographs; CERN: Geneva, Switzerland, 2005; ISBN 978-92-9083-260-7.
65.   Parodi, K.; Mairani, A.; Brons, S.; Hasch, B.G.; Sommerer, F.; Naumann, J.; Jäkel, O.; Haberer, T.; Debus, J. Monte Carlo simulations
      to support start-up and treatment planning of scanned proton and carbon ion therapy at a synchrotron-based facility. Phys. Med.
      Biol. 2012, 57, 3759–3784. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
66.   Mairani, A.; Brons, S.; Cerutti, F.; Fassò, A.; Ferrari, A.; Krämer, M.; Parodi, K.; Scholz, M.; Sommerer, F. The FLUKA Monte Carlo
      code coupled with the local effect model for biological calculations in carbon ion therapy. Phys. Med. Biol. 2010, 55, 4273–4289.
      [CrossRef] [PubMed]
