1. Radiat Res. 2014 Mar;181(3):284-92. doi: 10.1667/RR13303.1. Epub 2014 Mar 10.

Generalized time-dependent model of radiation-induced chromosomal aberrations in 
normal and repair-deficient human cells.

Ponomarev AL(1), George K, Cucinotta FA.

Author information:
(1)a  Division of Space Life Sciences, Universities Space Research Association, 
Houston, Texas 77058.

We have developed a model that can simulate the yield of radiation-induced 
chromosomal aberrations (CAs) and unrejoined chromosome breaks in normal and 
repair-deficient cells. The model predicts the kinetics of chromosomal 
aberration formation after exposure in the G₀/G₁ phase of the cell cycle to 
either low- or high-LET radiation. A previously formulated model based on a 
stochastic Monte Carlo approach was updated to consider the time dependence of 
DNA double-strand break (DSB) repair (proper or improper), and different cell 
types were assigned different kinetics of DSB repair. The distribution of the 
DSB free ends was derived from a mechanistic model that takes into account the 
structure of chromatin and DSB clustering from high-LET radiation. The kinetics 
of chromosomal aberration formation were derived from experimental data on DSB 
repair kinetics in normal and repair-deficient cell lines. We assessed different 
types of chromosomal aberrations with the focus on simple and complex exchanges, 
and predicted the DSB rejoining kinetics and misrepair probabilities for 
different cell types. The results identify major cell-dependent factors, such as 
a greater yield of chromosome misrepair in ataxia telangiectasia (AT) cells and 
slower rejoining in Nijmegen (NBS) cells relative to the wild-type. The model's 
predictions suggest that two mechanisms could exist for the inefficiency of DSB 
repair in AT and NBS cells, one that depends on the overall speed of joining 
(either proper or improper) of DNA broken ends, and another that depends on 
geometric factors, such as the Euclidian distance between DNA broken ends, which 
influences the relative frequency of misrepair.

DOI: 10.1667/RR13303.1
PMID: 24611656 [Indexed for MEDLINE]