                                                                                                                     KCL-PH-TH/2021-89




                                         Lessons for adaptive mesh refinement in numerical relativity


                                                     Miren Radia1 , Ulrich Sperhake1,2,3 , Amelia Drew1 , Katy
                                                     Clough4 , Pau Figueras4 , Eugene A. Lim5 , Justin L. Ripley1 ,
                                                     Josu C. Aurrekoetxea6 , Tiago França4 , Thomas Helfer2 ,




arXiv:2112.10567v3 [gr-qc] 20 Jun 2022
                                                     1 Department of Applied Mathematics and Theoretical Physics, Centre for
                                                     Mathematical Sciences, University of Cambridge, Wilberforce Road, Cambridge
                                                     CB3 0WA, United Kingdom
                                                     2 Department of Physics and Astronomy, Johns Hopkins University, 3400 N.

                                                     Charles Street, Baltimore, Maryland 21218, USA
                                                     3 California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, California 91125, USA
                                                     4 Geometry, Analysis and Gravitation, School of Mathematical Sciences, Queen

                                                     Mary University of London, Mile End Road, London E1 4NS, United Kingdom
                                                     5 Theoretical Particle Physics and Cosmology Group, Physics Department,

                                                     Kings College London, Strand, London WC2R 2LS, United Kingdom
                                                     6 Astrophysics, Denys Wilkinson Building, University of Oxford, Keble Road,

                                                     Oxford OX1 3RH, United Kingdom
                                                     E-mail: m.r.radia@damtp.cam.ac.uk, u.sperhake@damtp.cam.ac.uk,
                                                     a.drew@damtp.cam.ac.uk, k.clough@qmul.ac.uk, p.figueras@qmul.ac.uk,
                                                     eugene.a.lim@gmail.com, lloydripley@gmail.com,
                                                     josu.aurrekoetxea@physics.ox.ac.uk, t.e.franca@qmul.ac.uk,
                                                     thomashelfer@live.de


                                                     Abstract. We demonstrate the flexibility and utility of the Berger-Rigoutsos
                                                     Adaptive Mesh Refinement (AMR) algorithm used in the open-source numerical
                                                     relativity code GRChombo for generating gravitational waveforms from binary
                                                     black-hole inspirals, and for studying other problems involving non-trivial matter
                                                     configurations. We show that GRChombo can produce high quality binary
                                                     black-hole waveforms through a code comparison with the established numerical
                                                     relativity code Lean. We also discuss some of the technical challenges involved
                                                     in making use of full AMR (as opposed to, e.g. moving box mesh refinement),
                                                     including the numerical effects caused by using various refinement criteria when
                                                     regridding. We suggest several “rules of thumb” for when to use different tagging
                                                     criteria for simulating a variety of physical phenomena. We demonstrate the use of
                                                     these different criteria through example evolutions of a scalar field theory. Finally,
                                                     we also review the current status and general capabilities of GRChombo.


                                                     Keywords: numerical relativity, adaptive mesh refinement, gravitational waves,
                                                     compact objects, computational methods
Lessons for adaptive mesh refinement in numerical relativity                              2

1. Introduction

One of the key theoretical achievements that underpins the momentous detection of
gravitational waves (GWs) from the inspiralling black-hole (BH) binary GW150914
[1] is the the numerical relativity (NR) breakthrough in binary BH modeling in 2005
[2–4]. About 90 compact binary merger events have by now been observed by the GW
detector network [5–7] with a wide range of total masses and mass ratios of the binary
constituents. Indeed, it is a generic feature of general relativity and its character as
a highly non-linear theory that its solutions often span across a large range of spatial
and temporal scales. Combined with the inherent limits of computational resources,
it follows that any finite difference numerical code will require some form of spatial
and temporal mesh refinement to fully capture the dynamics of these solutions.
      In the numerical relativity (NR) community, many codes rely on the technique of
so-called “moving boxes” for mesh refinement, where a hierarchy of nested boxes with
increasingly fine meshes is centered around specified points (also sometimes referred
to as the “box-in-box” approach). Within this framework, boxes move around either
dynamically or along predetermined paths, in order to track objects’ trajectories1 .
This technique has proved remarkably successful, particularly in the case of generating
gravitational waveforms from binaries of compact objects for the template banks for
gravitational wave (GW) detectors, such as LIGO-Virgo-KAGRA [21–25]. Moving box
codes have matured to allow exploration of a wide variety of physics with a plethora
of diagnostic tools [26, 27].
      However, there are classes of problems for which the moving boxes technique
becomes impractical due to the topology of the system. Here, the use of “fully
adaptive” mesh refinement (AMR) is required where the mesh dynamically adjusts
itself in response to the underlying physical system being simulated, following user-
specified mesh refinement criteria. In general, there are two broad classes of AMR,
depending on whether newly refined meshes are added to the grid on a cell-by-cell
“tree-structured” basis [28–30] or on a box-by-box “block-structured” basis. In this
work, we will exclusively discuss the latter.
      In block-structured AMR, first described and implemented by Berger et al. [31],
the computational domain is built from a hierarchy of increasingly fine levels, with
each one containing a set of (not necessarily contiguous) boxes of meshes, with the
only condition being that a finer mesh must lie on top of one or possibly more meshes
from the next coarsest level. It is important to stress that this means it is allowed for
a fine mesh to straddle more than one coarse mesh—in other words the grid structure
is level -centric rather than box-centric. In contrast to the moving boxes approach,
this approach allows for highly flexible “many-boxes-in-many-boxes” mesh topologies,
enabling the study of dynamical systems where the spacetime dynamics are not driven
by localized compact systems e.g. in studying non spherical collapse scenarios [32, 33],
higher dimensional black holes/black string evolution [34–39], cosmic string evolution
[40–42], and the behavior of strongly inhomogeneous cosmological spacetimes [43–51].
      Despite its advantages, AMR is a double-edged sword and its flexibility comes
with a cost—each coarse-fine transition may introduce unwanted interpolation and
prolongation errors whose magnitude depends on the order of the coarse-fine boundary
    1 In addition, boxes may be allowed to merge if they come close enough together.   These
codes include those built upon the popular Cactus computational framework [8–10] such as the
McLachlan [11], LazEv [12], Maya [13], Lean [14, 15] and Canuda [16] codes, and the BAM code
[17–20].
Lessons for adaptive mesh refinement in numerical relativity                                     3

operators, in addition to introducing a “hard surface” which can generate spurious
unphysical reflections. We emphasize that AMR should not be treated as a “black
box”, but requires careful control and fine-tuning of refinement criteria, that often
depend on the physics being simulated, in order to work effectively. In particular, the
creation/destruction of a finer grid is determined by the tagging of cells for refinement,
which in turn is controlled by a tagging criterion. Although this ability to refine
regions can be incredibly powerful, in practice it can be difficult to manage the exact
placement of refined grids. Furthermore, we find that the management of coarse-
fine boundaries in dynamically sensitive regions of spacetime, such as near apparent
horizons, is essential for producing accurate results.
     In this paper we explain some of the tagging criteria and numerical techniques we
have used to obtain convergent, reliable results when using block-structured AMR. We
will discuss these issues in the context of the AMR NR code GRChombo [52, 53]2 ,
which was first introduced in 2015 and uses the Chombo [76] library. While our
methods apply directly to GRChombo, we believe many of the lessons we have learned
are general and may be useful to researchers who work with other numerical relativity
codes that make use of block-structured AMR, in particular those which rely on the
Berger-Rigoutsos [77] style grid generation methods.
     We demonstrate the utility of the techniques we have employed through a direct
comparison of gravitational waveforms generated by binary black-hole inspiral and
merger calculated by GRChombo and the more established Lean code which uses
the aforementioned “moving boxes” style mesh refinement, and show that GRChombo
is capable of achieving comparable production-level accuracy. We secondly apply AMR
techniques to the evolution of several scalar field models which exhibit dynamics on a
wide range of spatial and temporal scales, to demonstrate the relative advantages of
several tagging criteria implemented in GRChombo.
     This paper is organized as follows:
  • In section 2 we detail the computational framework of GRChombo with a focus
    on the AMR aspects.
  • In section 3 we discuss considerations for tagging criteria in AMR grid generation.
  • In sections 4 and 5 we illustrate how these techniques are applied in practice to
    simulations of BH binaries and spacetimes with a (self-interacting) scalar field.
     Our notation conventions are as follows. We use Greek letters µ, ν, . . . = 0, 1, 2, 3
for spacetime indices and Latin letters i, j, . . . = 1, 2, 3 for spatial indices. We use
a mostly plus signature (−+++) and geometric units c = G = 1. When there is a
potential for ambiguity between spacetime and purely spatial tensors (e.g. the Ricci
scalar R), we prepend a (4) to denote the spacetime quantity. In the sections on black
    2 Adaptive mesh refinement is now being used in several other NR codes. For example, those

based on the PAMR/AMRD mesh refinement libraries [54–56], the Hahndol code [4], which uses
PARAMESH [57], the HAD code [58], and the pseudospectral codes, SpEC [59], bamps [60] and
SFINGE [61] in which the AMR implementation is somewhat different to finite difference codes like
GRChombo. More recently, CosmoGRaPH [62], and Simflowny [63] both based on the SAMRAI
library [64–66], GRAthena++ [67], Gmunu [68] and Dendro-GR [69], all based on oct-tree AMR,
and GRAMSES [30] have been introduced. Alternatives are problem-adapted coordinate systems,
e.g. NRPy+ [70] or discontinuous Galerkin methods as in SpECTRE [71, 72] (see also [73, 74]).
Furthermore, it should be noted that some code frameworks, such as those based on the Carpet mesh
refinement driver [10], are technically capable of performing block-structured AMR. However, it can
be cumbersome to use and these codes typically rely on moving-box type methods (e.g. the codes
referenced in footnote 1). A brief overview of the history of NR codes can be found in [75].
Lessons for adaptive mesh refinement in numerical relativity                                              4

holes we set the mass scales with respect to the ADM mass of the spacetime, whereas
for the section on scalar fields we set µ = mc/~ = 1, which then describes lengths
relative to the scalar Compton wavelength3 .

2. Computational Framework

This section provides a comprehensive update of the methodology discussed in section
2 of [53]. See also Appendix D for details on how GRChombo is parallelized.

2.1. Mathematical equations and notational conventions
2.1.1. Evolution equations and gauge conditions GRChombo implements the CCZ4
formulation [78, 79] in order to evolve solutions of the Einstein equations, which we
review below. We have found empirically with AMR that the inclusion of constraint
damping terms in this formalism can be important to maintain accuracy; these
mitigate the additional noise introduced by spurious reflections off the refinement
boundaries due to the more complicated grid structures [80] (when compared with
moving-box mesh refinement grids). The Z4 equation of motion with constraint
damping and cosmological constant is [78]4
                                                                              
 (4)                                                     α               1
     Rµν −Λgµν +2∇(µ Zν) −2κ1 n(µ Zν) +κ1 (1+κ2 )gµν nα Z = 8π Tµν − gµν T , (1)
                                                                         2

where ∇ is the Levi-Civita connection of the metric gµν , (4) Rµν is the Ricci tensor of ∇,
Λ is the cosmological constant, Z µ is the Z4 vector which vanishes on physical solutions
of the Einstein equation, nµ is the future-directed unit normal to the foliation of spatial
slices, κ1 and κ2 are constant damping parameters, Tµν is the energy-momentum
tensor, and T = g αβ Tαβ is its trace.
     In the standard 3 + 1 decomposition of spacetime [81, 82], the metric in adapted
coordinates (t, xi ) takes the form

                        ds2 = −α2 dt2 + γij (dxi + β i dt)(dxj + β j dt),                               (2)

where γij is the spatial metric, α = 1/kdtk is the lapse function and β i is the shift
vector. The future-directed unit normal to the foliation is
                                                             1 µ
                                                     nµ =      ∂t − β k ∂kµ ,
                                                                           
                          nµ := −α(dt)µ ,                                                               (3)
                                                             α
and the extrinsic curvature is
                                                1
                                        Kµν := − (Ln γ)µν ,                                             (4)
                                                2
which in adapted coordinates (2) becomes
                                     1 
                                        ∂t γij − β m ∂m γij − 2γm(i ∂j) β m .
                                                                           
                         Kij = −                                                                        (5)
                                    2α
    3 If we are interpreting the results in terms of a physical particle mass, this is equivalent to setting

the value of ~ in the code. Note that in general ~ 6= 1 in NR simulations (as this would imply that
one unit in the length scale is equal to the Planck length lPl ).
    4 Note the sign difference between the unit normal in [78] and here. We choose the sign which

ensures the unit normal is future-directed.
Lessons for adaptive mesh refinement in numerical relativity                                             5

In analogy to the spacetime metric, we decompose the energy-momentum tensor
according to

         ρ := nα nβ T αβ ,     Si := −γiα nβ T αβ ,       Sij := γiα γjβ T αβ ,    S := γ ij Sij .     (6)

We conformally rescale the spatial metric as5
                                                                   1 ij
                                   γ̃ij = χγij ,         γ̃ ij =     γ ,                               (7)
                                                                   χ

where χ = [det(γij )]−1/3 so that the determinant of the conformal metric γ̃ij is
unity. As in the BSSNOK formulation, we introduce the conformally rescaled traceless
extrinsic curvature,                              
                                             1
                            Ãij := χ Kij − Kγij ,                               (8)
                                             3
with K = γ ij Kij and the conformal connection functions

                                      Γ̃i := γ̃ jk Γ̃ijk = −∂j γ̃ ij ,                                 (9)

where Γ̃ijk are the Christoffel symbols with respect to the conformal metric γ̃ij . Finally,
we decompose the Z4 vector by defining6

                                Θ := −nα Z α ,            Θi := γ iα Z α .                           (10)

Rather than evolving the Θi directly, we instead incorporate them into a set of modified
conformal connection functions

                                                                         Θi
                                  Γ̂i := Γ̃i + 2γ̃ ik Θk = Γ̃i + 2          .                        (11)
                                                                         χ
Finally our complete set of dynamical variables are
                               n                          o
                                χ, γ̃ij , K, Ãij , Θ, Γ̂i ,                                         (12)

and the CCZ4 evolution equations are7
    5 This is the main difference with the previous GRChombo paper [53], where χ2 was used in

place of χ.
    6 The spatial projection is often denoted just Z i in the literature e.g. [78], but we have changed the

symbol in order to make clear that this is the projected 3-vector as opposed to the spatial components
of the Z4 vector
    7 Note that by default we make the modification ακ → κ mentioned in [79] that allows stable
                                                            1       1
evolution of BHs with κ3 = 1. However, Eqs. (13-18) do not have this modification.
Lessons for adaptive mesh refinement in numerical relativity                                6



                    2
   ∂t χ = β k ∂k χ + χ(αK − ∂k β k ),                                                     (13)
                    3
                                                              2
  ∂t γ̃ij = β k ∂k γ̃ij + γ̃ki ∂j β k + γ̃kj ∂i β k − 2αÃij − γ̃ij ∂k β k ,              (14)
                                                            3
   ∂t K = β ∂k K + α R̂ + K(K − 2Θ) − 3ακ1 (1 + κ2 )Θ − γ kl Dk Dl α
              k
                                                                               (15)
                + 4πα(S − 3ρ) − 3αΛ,
                           h                          iTF
 ∂t Ãij = β k ∂k Ãij + χ −Di Dj α + α(R̂ij − 8πSij )
                                                                             (16)
                                     2
                + Ãij α(K − 2Θ) − ∂k β + 2Ãk(i ∂j) β k − 2αγ̃ kl Ãik Ãlj ,
                                          k
                                     3
                                                      
                        1                 2 2
  ∂t Θ = β ∂k Θ + α R̂ − Ãkl Ã + K − 2ΘK − ακ1 Θ(2 + κ2 ) − Θk ∂k α
             k                       kl
                        2                 3                                    (17)
                − 8παρ − αΛ,
                                         Θi            Θi          Θi
                                                       
       i     k      i   2      k   i
  ∂t Γ̂ = β ∂k Γ̂ +        ∂k β Γ̃ + 2κ3       − 2αK        − 2ακ1
                        3                 χ            χ           χ
              + 2γ̃ ik (α∂k Θ − Θ∂k α) − 2Ãik ∂k α + 2αΓ̃ikl Ãkl
                          
                            4                    ∂k χ
                                                        
                                                                          Θk
                                                                                         (18)
                     − α γ̃ ik ∂k K + 3Ãik               − Γ̃k + 2κ3            ∂k β i
                            3                      χ                       χ
                                               1
                            + γ̃ kl ∂k ∂l β i + γ̃ ik ∂l ∂k β l − 16παγ̃ ik Sk ,
                                               3
where Di is the Levi-Civita connection on the spatial slice, [·]TF denotes the trace-free
part of the expression in square brackets, R̂ij is the modified Ricci tensor, given in
terms of the normal Ricci tensor of Di , Rij by

                                     R̂ij := Rij + 2D(i Θj) ,                             (19)

and κ3 is a third damping parameter. At each right-hand side evaluation, we construct
the quantity Θi /χ using the evolved Γ̂i and Γ̃i computed from the metric and its
derivatives in (11). The covariant second derivatives of the lapse are computed via
                                                   1
                   γ kl Dk Dl α = γ̃ kl χ∂k ∂l α − γ̃ kl ∂k α∂l χ − χΓ̃k ∂k α,            (20)
                                                   2
                                                k           1
                        Di Dj α = ∂i ∂j α − Γ̃ij ∂k α +         (∂i α∂j χ
                                                          2χ                              (21)
                                        +∂i χ∂j α − γ̃ij γ̃ kl ∂k α∂l χ .
                                                                       


The modified Ricci tensor (19) is given by8
                                                  1  χ     Z
                                                              
                                  R̂ij = R̃ij +     Rij + Rij   ,                         (22)
                                                  χ
   8 Note the somewhat unconventional factor of χ−1 multiplying Rχ .
                                                                 ij
Lessons for adaptive mesh refinement in numerical relativity                                        7

with
                             1                                  1
                     R̃ij = − γ̃ kl ∂k ∂l γ̃ij + γ̃k(i ∂j) Γ̂k + Γ̂k ∂k γ̃ij
                             2                                 2                               (23)
                               + γ̃ lm Γ̃kli Γ̃jkm + Γ̃klj Γ̃ikm + Γ̃kim Γ̃klj ,
                      χ    1h                                  i
                     Rij =     D̃i D̃j χ + γ̃ij γ̃ kl D̃k D̃l χ
                           2
                                    1                                                           (24)
                                         ∂i χ∂j χ + 3γ̃ij γ̃ kl ∂k χ∂l χ ,
                                                                        
                               −
                                   4χ
                             k
                      Z    Θ
                     Rij =      (γ̃ik ∂j χ + γ̃jk ∂i χ − γ̃ij ∂k χ) ,                            (25)
                            χ

and Γ̃ijk = γ̃il Γ̃ljk . Finally, the modified Ricci scalar is given by the trace of the
modified Ricci tensor:
                                       R̂ = χγ̃ kl R̂kl .                           (26)
By default, GRChombo uses the damping parameters7

                                  ακ1 = 0.1, κ2 = 0 and κ3 = 1.                                  (27)

    To close the system (13)-(18), we need to specify gauge conditions for the lapse
and shift. Although the structure of the code allows easy modification of the gauge,
by default we use a Bona-Masso-type slicing condition [83] of the form

                                 ∂t α = a1 β k ∂k α − a2 αa3 (K − 2Θ),                           (28)

where a1 , a2 and a3 are constant parameters. Note that this reduces to the familiar
1+log slicing in the case
                             a1 = 1, a2 = 2 and a3 = 1,                        (29)
which is the default. For the shift, we use the Gamma-driver shift condition [3, 4] in
the form:

                         ∂t β i = b1 β k ∂k β i + b2 B i ,                                       (30)
                             i           k     i      k      i      i          i
                         ∂t B = b1 (β ∂k B − β ∂k Γ̂ ) + ∂t Γ̂ − ηB ,                            (31)

where b1 , b2 and η are constant parameters. By default we take b1 = 0 and b2 = 3/4,
whereas the value of η depends on the specific configuration considered (typically
O(1/MADM )). Together, these gauge conditions are commonly referred to as the
moving puncture gauge.
    We enforce the tracelessness of Ãij (8) before every RHS evaluation and at the
end of each full timestep. Furthermore, we also enforce the condition χ ≥ χmin and
α ≥ αmin before every RHS evaluation and at the end of each full timestep, where
the default values are χmin = 10−4 = αmin , in order to ensure these variables do not
become arbitrarily small or negative due to discretization error9 .
    9 Typically any values that are affected by this procedure lie behind a horizon so are causally

disconnected from most of the computational domain. In cosmological simulations the conformal
factor is directly related to the scale factor and thus in rapidly expanding or contracting spacetimes
this limit may need to be adjusted.
Lessons for adaptive mesh refinement in numerical relativity                                     8

  As is common when using the moving puncture gauge with BH spacetimes,
GRChombo can track the position of the puncture(s) xp by solving [26]

                                        dxip
                                             = −β i (xp ),                                    (32)
                                         dt
which is integrated using the trapezium rule at user-specified time intervals.
    During evolutions, we monitor the violations of the Hamiltonian and momentum
constraints which are given by
                           2
               H := R + K 2 − Ãkl Ãkl − 2Λ − 16πρ,                                          (33)
                          3                                  
                       kl                                ∂l χ    2
              Mi := γ̃     ∂k Ãli − 2Γ̃m  Ã
                                        l(i k)m − 3Ã ik        − ∂i K − 8πSi .               (34)
                                                         2χ      3

In the continuum limit these two quantities should vanish. From the Bianchi identities,
if the constraints vanish on the initial data surface, they vanish throughout the
spacetime [84]. However, given errors due to our discretization of the equations of
motion, we expect there to be small violations of the constraints in our numerical
simulations. We often monitor the constraint violation to assess the accuracy of a
given run.
     In the case of non-vacuum spacetimes, one can normalize the constraints with
some measure (e.g. the maximum) of their matter sources, i.e. H with ρ and Mi with
Si .

2.1.2. Initial Data For BH binaries, we have integrated the TwoPunctures
spectral solver [85] into GRChombo. This provides binary puncture data [86] of
Bowen-York type [87]; the version we use also incorporates the improvements described
in [88] that allows for fast spectral interpolation of the pseudospectral solution onto,
e.g. a Cartesian grid. Besides TwoPunctures, GRChombo includes a class for non-
spinning binary Bowen-York data with an approximate solution of the Hamiltonian
constraint for the conformal factor [89], which is valid in the limit of small boosts
|P|  M , where P is the initial momentum of an individual black hole and M is some
measure of the total mass.
     We also provide initial data for Kerr BHs using the formulation in [90], which
allows for the evolution of near-extremal BHs within the moving puncture approach
to black hole evolution.
     For matter spacetimes, one must in general solve the Hamiltonian and momentum
constraints numerically to obtain valid initial conditions for the metric that correspond
to the energy and momentum distributions which are chosen (including BHs using the
methods above, where required). For time-symmetric spherically symmetric initial
data this can be done using shooting methods, as for the axion star data used in
section 5 and previous works [91–98]. In inhomogeneous cosmological spacetimes,
numerical solutions for an initial matter configuration should be obtained using
relaxation or multigrid methods, as in [47–50]10 .
  10 Most of these works assume an initial time symmetry in order to avoid solving the momentum

constraints. A fully general multigrid initial condition solver for GRChombo that solves the
coupled constraint system for any scalar field distribution with and without BHs is currently under
development.
Lessons for adaptive mesh refinement in numerical relativity                                        9

2.2. Code features
2.2.1. Discretization and time-stepping GRChombo evolves the CCZ4 equations
using the method of lines with a standard fourth-order Runge-Kutta method (RK4).
For the spatial discretization, we typically use either fourth or sixth order centered
stencils except for the advection terms, for which we switch to lopsided stencils of the
same order depending on the sign of the shift vector component. For completeness,
the expressions for the stencils are provided in Appendix B.
     Finite difference methods can often introduce spurious high-frequency modes,
particularly when using adaptive mesh refinement and regridding. To ameliorate this,
GRChombo uses N = 3 Kreiss-Oliger (KO) dissipation [99]; at every evaluation of
the right-hand side (RHS) for an evolution variable F , we add the term
               σ
                  (Fi−3 − 6Fi−2 + 15Fi−1 − 20Fi + 15Fi+1 − 6Fi+2 + Fi+3 )                        (35)
             64∆x
to the RHS, where ∆x is the relevant grid spacing (cf. (37)). A von Neumann stability
analysis [26] shows that this scheme, when applied to the trivial partial differential
equation (PDE) ∂t F = 0, is linearly stable only if
                                                      2
                                           0≤σ≤         ,                                        (36)
                                                     αC
where αC = ∆t/∆x is the Courant-Friedrichs-Lewy factor, which we typically set
to 1/4, and ∆t is the size of the timestep11 . Note that we always use N = 3 KO
dissipation, independent of the order of spatial discretization. Naively, one might
question this choice for sixth order spatial derivative stencils as the conventional
wisdom is to pick N such that 2N − 1 > m, where m is the order of the finite
difference scheme (see, for example, [26]). However, in this case, what matters is the
order of the time stepping which is still fourth order12 , hence the dissipation operator
does not “spoil” the convergence properties of the scheme. This is consistent with the
approach discussed in section 3.2 of [100].

2.2.2. Berger-Rigoutsos AMR In GRChombo, the grid comprises a hierarchy of
cell-centered Cartesian meshes consisting of up to lmax + 1 refinement levels labeled13
l = 0, . . . , lmax each with grid spacing

                                ∆xl = 2lmax −l ∆xlmax = ∆x0 /2l .                                (37)

GRChombo uses block-structured AMR, so each refinement level is split into boxes
which are distributed between the CPUs as described in Appendix D.
     At regridding or initial grid creation, on a given refinement level l, cells are tagged
for refinement according to a tagging criterion C = C(i). In a given cell with indices
i = (i, j, k) and corresponding Cartesian coordinates14 x = (xi , yj , zk ), if C(i) > τR ,
   11 Note that the stability analysis makes a number of assumptions and problems can begin to

appear towards the upper end of the range (36). We have observed that a typical symptom of an
instability due to too large σ is the appearance of a checkerboard-like pattern in otherwise spatially
homogeneous regions of the spacetime.
   12 Also note that Theorem 9.1 in [99] only refers to the order of the time stepping.
   13 Note that the finest level that exists may be less than l
                                                               max .
   14 Note that the indices here are of the discrete cells on the grid as opposed to spacetime

components.
Lessons for adaptive mesh refinement in numerical relativity                                    10

                          Sx


                                                                           x



              (1)


                                                     ∆Sx

                                                                                 x




              (2)




              (3)


                 Figure 1. Schematic illustration of the partitioning algorithm. For simplicity,
                 we show a 2D grid and only consider partitioning in the x direction. The cells
                 tagged for refinement are indicated with •. In (1), the signature Sx is computed
                 and two “holes” are found where the signature vanishes. The line (plane in 3D)
                 of partition is then at the hole with the largest index (rightmost). The result of
                 the partitioning is shown in (2). To partition the right box in (2), the signature
                 is computed but this time there are no holes so the algorithm looks for zero
                 crossings of the discrete Laplacian of the signature ∆Sx . The zero-crossing with
                 largest change is then selected. This algorithm terminates once all boxes have
                 reached the required fill ratio FR .


where τR is a pre-specified threshold value (which may vary with l), then the cell is
tagged for refinement. We discuss techniques to design a suitable tagging criterion
and aspects to consider in section 3.
      In block-structured AMR, the main challenge after tagging cells is finding an
efficient algorithm to partition the cells that require refinement into blocks or boxes.
GRChombo uses Chombo’s implementation of the Berger-Rigoutsos grid generation
Lessons for adaptive mesh refinement in numerical relativity                                          11

algorithm [77] in order to do this.
      For this purpose, we define the block factor as the number of cells that must
divide the side lengths of all blocks; it is a specifiable parameter. Furthermore these
side lengths must not exceed the specified maximum box size. In order to enforce the
block factor on level l + 1, starting with the tagged cells on level l, Chombo generates
a temporary new set of tagged cells on a virtual coarser level l − n where n is chosen
such that the length of one cell on level l − n corresponds to the block factor on level
l + 115 . The new set of coarser tags are derived using a global OR operation, i.e. as
long as any of the l level cells corresponding to the coarser level cell is tagged, the
virtual coarser level cell will be tagged. Chombo then applies the Berger-Rigoutsos
partitioning algorithm on this coarser level to construct boxes of grids which obey
both the desired block factor and maximum box size. We typically choose both to be
a multiple of the processor vector width for optimal performance.
      For completeness, we next review the Berger-Rigoutsos algorithm (see also figure
1). We find the minimum box that encloses all of the tagged cells on this level. Let
T (i) be the tagging indicator function defined by
                                        (
                                          1, if C(i) > τR ,
                                T (i) =                                             (38)
                                          0, otherwise.

and define the signatures or traces of the tagging by
                                    X          Z
                          Sx (i) :=     T (i) = T (i) dy dz,                                       (39)
                                            j,k
                                            X               Z
                                Sy (j) :=         T (i) =       T (i) dx dz,                       (40)
                                            i,k
                                            X               Z
                               Sz (k) :=          T (i) =       T (i) dx dy.                       (41)
                                            i,j

First, we look for “holes” in the signatures i.e. if there exist i, j or k for which Sx (i),
Sy (j) or Sz (k) vanish which corresponds to there being no tagged cells along the plane
orthogonal to the signature direction. If there are holes, we choose the one with largest
index over all the dimensions (since it is more efficient to have fewer big boxes than
more small boxes) as the plane of partition. If there are no holes, we next look for
inflections (see [77] and their discussion of figure 10 for details) in the signatures by
computing their discrete Laplacian, for example,

                           ∆Sx (i) = Sx (i − 1) − 2Sx (i) + Sx (i + 1),                            (42)

and searching for zero-crossings in ∆Sx (i). Heuristically, this corresponds to a rough
boundary between tagged and untagged regions; cf. the partitioning in step (2) of
figure 1). If there are inflections, then, in each direction, we pick the inflection with
the greatest difference, for example,

                             |δ(∆Sx (i))| = |∆Sx (i − 1) − ∆Sx (i)|,                               (43)
   15 For example if the block factor is 4, then n = 1 since the refinement ratio is 2 and 2(l+1)−(l−1) =

4. Note that this means the block factor must be a power of 2.
Lessons for adaptive mesh refinement in numerical relativity                                          12

As for the holes, we then pick the greatest inflection index over all the dimensions as
our plane of partition. If there are no holes or inflections in the signatures, we simply
split the box along the midpoint of the direction with the longest side.
     After partitioning, we check whether the partition is sufficiently efficient,
specifically whether the proportion of tagged cells to all cells in the partition exceeds
a user-specified fill ratio threshold, FR < 1 and that the lengths of the boxes are at
most the pre-specified maximum box size (which we choose in order to ensure sufficient
load balancing). If these tests are passed then we accept the partition and, if not, we
continue to partition recursively discarding any boxes that do not contain tagged cells.
     Note that, whilst a higher value of FR will result in a more efficient partition
in the sense that there will be a greater ratio of tagged to untagged cells, this is not
always the most computationally efficient choice as there are greater overheads with
smaller boxes (for example, there will be more ghost cells). There could also be more
fluctuation in the structure of the grids between consecutive regrids which may result
in greater noise. Although the optimal fill ratio depends on the particular physical
problem and the computational resources, we typically use FR = 0.7.
     Finally the boxes in the partition are refined, that is, they are defined on the next
finer level (l + 1) with twice the resolution (37). For newly created regions on this finer
level, we interpolate the data from the coarser level using fourth-order interpolation.
     The regridding process starts on the finest level that currently exist (or at most
level lmax − 1) and works up the hierarchy on increasingly coarse levels until the base
level, from whose timestep the regrid was called, is reached (which need not be l = 0).
It is therefore only possible to add a single extra level (up to lmax ) at each regrid.
After the regrid on level l, the union of the set of cells in the new boxes on this level
(plus an additional pre-specified buffer region) with the set of cells tagged on level
l − 1 is used as the final set of tagged cells on level l − 1 in order to ensure proper
nesting 16 [101]. This also ensures that cells on coarser levels will be tagged if any of
their corresponding finer level cells are tagged.
     The frequency of regridding is user-specifiable on each refinement level l < lmax ,
though, since a regrid on level l = l0 enforces a regrid on all levels l0 ≤ l < lmax ,
for problems without rapidly varying (in time) length scales, it is usually sufficient to
regrid every few timesteps on one of the more coarse levels (e.g. for compact object
binaries). Not only does reducing the frequency of regridding reduce the computational
cost, but since regridding introduces errors/noise due to interpolation, we have also
found that this can improve the accuracy of the simulation.
     The Courant condition limits the size of the maximum time steps one can take
on the finer levels. Rather than evolving all refinement levels with the same timestep,
we use subcycling by following the Berger-Colella evolution algorithm [101], which we
now review. As the algorithm is recursive, we can consider evolving a set of coarser
and finer grids at level l and l + 1 respectively in the AMR grid hierarchy. First, one
time step is taken on the coarser grids (i.e. those at level l). One then evolves the
finer (level l + 1) grids for as many time steps until they have advanced to the same
  16 By proper nesting we mean that

 (i) The physical region corresponding to a level l − 1 cell must be fully refined or not refined at all,
     that is it must be completely covered by level l cells and not partially refined.
(ii) There must be at least one level l cell between the boundary of l + 1 and the boundary of level l
     except at the boundary of the entire computational domain. In practice we even need two such
     buffer cells (corresponding to 4 cells on level l + 1) for fourth and sixth-order spatial stencils.
Lessons for adaptive mesh refinement in numerical relativity                                        13

time as the coarse grid. As we have hard-coded the time steps on each level, ∆tl ,
so that ∆tl = ∆tl−1 /2, the grids on level l + 1 will then take two time steps after
the grids on level l take one time step. After level l + 1 has “caught up” with level
l, the mean of the data in the [23 = 8] cells covering a single level l cell is calculated
and this value is copied back onto level l. Note that this particular procedure is only
second-order accurate in contrast to the restriction operation in a vertex-centred code
which requires no approximation. This may partially explain some of the difference
in convergence orders we observed between GRChombo and the vertex-centred code
Lean in section 4.
     The ghost cells at the interface between the finer and coarser grids are set by
interpolating the values of the coarser grid in both space (due to the cell centered grid)
and time (due to the requirement for intermediate values in the RK4 timestepping).
The time interpolation is achieved by fitting the coefficients of a 3rd order polynomial
in t using the values obtained at each substep of the RK4 timestepping on the relevant
cells of the coarser level (see [102] for more detail).17

2.2.3. Boundary Conditions GRChombo implements several classes of boundary
conditions, including:
  • Periodic - evolution variables ϕ obey ϕ(x + L) = ϕ(x) in some or all Cartesian
    directions.
  • Static - boundary values are fixed at their initial values.
  • Reflective - one uses the symmetry of the spacetime to reduce the volume evolved.
    For example, in a simple equal mass head-on BH merger, one needs only 1/8 of
    the domain; the rest can be inferred from the evolved values [103]. Note that
    each evolution variable has a different parity across each reflective boundary.
  • Extrapolating - both zeroth and first order schemes (by radial distance from a
    central point). These are especially useful for variables which asymptote to a
    spatially uniform but time varying value (see [104–106]).
  • Sommerfeld/radiative - these permit (massless) outgoing radiation to leave the
    grid without reflections by assuming a solution of the form ϕ = ϕ0 + u(r − t)/r
    at the boundaries, where u can be any arbitrary function and ϕ0 is a constant
    asymptotic value (see section 5.9 of [26]).

2.2.4. Interpolation and wave extraction GRChombo features an AMR interpolator
which allows the user to interpolate any grid variable, its first derivatives and any
second derivative at an arbitrary point within the computational domain. The AMR
interpolator starts searching for the requested points on the finest available level and
then progresses down the hierarchy to increasingly coarse levels until all requested
points are found in order to ensure the most accurate result. It supports interpolation
via an arbitrary interpolation algorithm. The provided algorithms include Lagrange
polynomial interpolation up to arbitrary order (although this is limited by the number
of available ghost cells), using the algorithm of [107] to calculate the stencils on the
fly and then memoizing them in order to increase efficiency, and “nearest neighbour”
   17 An alternative approach would be the use of larger ghost zones in the finer level, with the outer

ones discarded at each RK step (for example, see section 2.3 of [10]). One disadvantage here is the
extra memory use, especially beyond the fixed-box-hierarchy case.
Lessons for adaptive mesh refinement in numerical relativity                             14

interpolation. By default, and in the remainder of this paper, we use fourth order
Lagrange polynomial interpolation.
     GRChombo includes tools for the extraction of data over an arbitrary user-
defined 2D surface, built on top of the AMR interpolator, with spherical and cylindrical
surfaces being implemented as examples. There is also a user-friendly interface for
integrating arbitrary functions of the extracted grid variables and their derivatives
over the surface using either the trapezium rule, Simpson’s rule, Boole’s rule or the
midpoint rule in each surface coordinate direction.
     Often the most important outputs of a numerical relativity simulation are the
calculated gravitational waves. To that end, GRChombo uses the Newman-Penrose
formalism [108]. We describe the formulae for calculating the relevant Weyl scalar Ψ4
(including terms arising from the Z4 vector) in Appendix A. We use the extraction
routines described above to interpolate the values of Ψ4 on multiple spheres of fixed
coordinate radius and then determine the modes ψlm with respect to the spin-weight
−2 spherical harmonics −2 Y lm using the formula
                                    I
                                        rex Ψ4 |r=rex −2 Ȳ lm dΩ,
                                                             
                         rex ψlm =                                                 (44)
                                     S2

where dΩ = sin θ dθ dφ is the area element on the unit sphere S 2 . We use the trapezium
rule for the integration over φ (since the periodicity means that any quadrature
converges exponentially [109]) and Simpson’s rule for the integration over θ.

3. Considerations for tagging criteria used for grid generation

We have found that the choice of tagging criteria can greatly impact the stability and
accuracy of a given simulation. Here we mention several factors to consider when
designing tagging criteria for use in GRChombo and other codes with similar AMR
algorithms. We also provide some explicit examples of tagging criteria and discuss
their relative merits.

3.1. Buffer Regions
One of the problems of many tagging criteria we have tried is that they can often
introduce several refinement levels over a relatively small distance in space. This leads
to the boundaries of these refinement levels being particularly close to one another.
Due to the errors introduced by interpolation at these boundaries, they can add
spurious reflections or noise. This is exacerbated when other refinement boundaries
are nearby, allowing for this noise to be repeatedly reflected and even amplified before
it has time to dissipate (e.g. via Kreiss-Oliger dissipation – see section 2.2.1). A
particularly simple way to mitigate this problem is to increase the buffer regions,
i.e. the number of cells nB between refinement levels. Since the regridding algorithm
starts at the finest level and works up the hierarchy to coarser levels (see section 2.2.2),
increasing this parameter actually increases the size of the coarser levels rather than
shrinking the finer levels in order to enforce this buffer region restriction.

3.2. Considerations for black-hole spacetimes
Here we describe several techniques that we have used when creating tagging criteria
to evolve black-hole spacetimes. The major complication with evolving black holes is
Lessons for adaptive mesh refinement in numerical relativity                          15

that they have an event horizon. In practice, it is often challenging to find the true
event horizon, which would require tracing geodesics through the full evolution of the
spacetime. Therefore NR simulations typically consider the location of the apparent
horizon instead, which always lies inside the event horizon [110]. Mathematically,
the region within an apparent horizon is causally disconnected from its exterior.
For a given numerical approximation, however, artifacts from the discretization can
propagate from behind the horizon and contaminate the rest of the computational
domain.
     As a consequence of this superluminal propagation of numerical noise, we often
find that GRChombo simulations of BHs are particularly sensitive to the presence of
refinement boundaries. One should avoid adding refinement within the horizon (which
in any case is unobservable and not usually of interest), but problems are particularly
severe where a refinement boundary intersects the apparent horizon. In such cases
we have observed significant phase inaccuracies and drifts in the horizon area (some
even violating the second law of black hole mechanics). Similar problems may occur
if a refinement boundary is close to but does not intersect the horizon. In order to
avoid these issues, we typically enforce the tagging of all cells within the horizon plus
                                          max
a buffer radius up to a maximum level lBH      (which need not necessarily be lmax and
may differ for each BH in the simulation). If rp is the coordinate distance from the
puncture of a BH of mass MBH in a spacetime with total mass M ∼ 2MBH , then, for
η ∼ 1/M in the moving puncture gauge (28-31), after the initial gauge adjustment
the apparent horizon is at approximately rp = MBH (see figure 4 in [18]). Guided by
this approximation, we can tag all cells with rp < MBH + b, where b is a pre-specified
parameter. Although one might think choosing b ∝ MBH for each BH might be the
most sensible choice for unequal mass configurations, we have found larger BHs less
sensitive to the presence of refinement boundaries. Thus, choosing b ∝ M the same
for each BH in a binary usually works sufficiently well.
     Increasing the size of the buffer regions between refinement boundaries by
adjusting nB as discussed in section 3.1 can help to keep refinement boundaries
sufficiently spaced apart. However, we have also separately enforced the spacing out
of refinement boundaries by doubling the radius of the second and third finest levels
covering a BH. This leads to tagging cells on level l (to be refined on level l + 1) with
                                                  max
                            rp < (MBH + b)2min(lBH −l−1,2)                          (45)

     In spacetimes where BH horizons are dynamical (often the target of AMR
simulations), one can in principle use the locations of apparent horizons to define
tagged regions. However, rather than incorporating the output of a horizon finder
into the tagging criterion, a simpler and in most cases equally effective method
can be obtained from using contours of the conformal factor χ and tagging regions
with χ < χ0 , where χ0 is a prespecified threshold value which may vary on each
refinement level. This gives a reasonably robust and general method of identifying
the approximate locations of horizons. Further details on precise values and their
dependence on the BH spin are given in Appendix C.

3.3. Asymmetric grids
The grid-generation algorithm (section 2.2.2) is inherently asymmetric, for example,
it picks the “hole” with largest index as the partition plane. This means that even
if the tagging has symmetries, the grids themselves may not obey the same or any
Lessons for adaptive mesh refinement in numerical relativity                          16

symmetries. For example, whilst one might expect that, for tagging cells with (45), the
grids would have reflective symmetry in all three coordinate directions, this is often
not the case, particularly for larger FR . This asymmetry can lead to undesirable
behaviour. For example, when simulating the head-on collision of two BHs with no
symmetry assumptions (as described in section 2.2.3) with the tagging of (45), the
punctures can deviate slightly from the collision axis. We can “fix” this asymmetry by
replacing
                      rp → % = max(|x − xp |, |y − yp |, |z − zp |)                (46)
in (45) so that the tagged regions are boxes rather than spheres (this tagging is similar
to what is done in some moving-box style mesh refinement codes). Whilst there is
inevitably a loss of efficiency from this choice, this is typically outweighed by the
reductions in error achieved. Clearly, this approach pushes the AMR method in the
direction of a moving boxes approach; in practice, we therefore apply it predominantly
to BH simulations but not for more complex matter structures that require the full
flexibility of AMR.

3.4. Using truncation error for tagging cells
Truncation error tagging was introduced by Berger et al. [31]. We have implemented
truncation error tagging in GRChombo by using a shadow hierarchy (e.g. [111]).
In this scheme, we estimate the truncation error on a grid at level l by comparing
the solution of a specially chosen variable f on that level to the coarser level directly
“beneath” it on the grid:
                               τl,f (i) = |fl (i) − fl−1 (i)| .                      (47)
We note that the error (47) clearly must be computed before we average the finer grid
values onto the coarser grid. As Chombo uses a cell-centered scheme, in order to
compare the values of f on the two levels, we interpolate f from the coarser level onto
the finer level using fourth order interpolation. If we compute the truncation error of
multiple grid variables, we combine the error estimates for each variable at each point:
                                         v
                                         uX              2
                                         u     (τl,f (i))
                                τl (i) = t                 ,                       (48)
                                                   Lf
                                           f


where Lf is a normalizing factor for each variable f . We then set this as our tagging
criterion in (38): C(i) = τl (i). The free parameters in this scheme of tagging are
the choice of grid variables that one computes truncation error estimates for and the
normalization factors for each variable.
     The main advantages of truncation error tagging are that it allows for a
conceptually straightforward way to implement convergence tests in AMR codes: as
one increases the base grid resolution, one should scale the truncation error tagging
threshold for grid generation with the expected convergence of the code. Additionally,
truncation error tagging is a “natural” tagging criterion as it refines regions that are
most likely to be under resolved.

3.5. Tagging criteria based on grid variables and derived quantities
Some physical problems lend themselves to other tagging criteria, and GRChombo
permits the user to easily specify refinement criteria based on any properties of
Lessons for adaptive mesh refinement in numerical relativity                                     17

the local grid variables or derived expressions of them, for example, derivatives or
curvature scalars. We caution though that the tagging criteria we discuss below are
not functions of geometric scalars, so the performance of a given criterion will depend
on the formulation and gauge conditions used. Nevertheless, for the Bona-Masso-type
slicing ((28)) and gamma-driver ((30)-(31)) conditions we have the most experience
with, these gauge conditions have proven to be reliable and robust.
      First we discuss tagging criteria based on the conformal factor of the spatial
metric χ. Contours of χ can provide a good choice in dynamical BH cases as detailed
in section 3.2 and Appendix C, to ensure that horizons are covered. Takingp differences
of χ across a cell using locally evaluated derivatives, i.e. using C = δ ij ∂i χ∂j χ∆x,
also provides an efficient measure
                            p      to refine key areas18 . In particular, using the second
                               ij
derivative of χ, i.e. C = δ ∂i ∂j χ∆x, is efficient because usually it is the regions
in which gradients are changing most rapidly that require greater resolution, rather
than steep linear gradients. However, in practice any derivative can be used provided
the thresholds are tuned appropriately for the problem at hand.
      Alternatively, we find empirically that the sum of the absolute value of the
different components of the Hamiltonian constraint proves to be an efficient tagging
criteria in dynamical matter spacetimes. The condition is
                                                   2
                    C = Habs = |R| + |Ãkl Ãkl | + K 2 + 16π|ρ| + 2|Λ|,                       (49)
                                                   3
where R = γ ij Rij is the Ricci scalar. As we will see in section 5.2, this quantity
generally remains constant in regions of spacetime where the individual metric and
matter components oscillate in a stable, time-invariant manner (as in the case of the
stable axion star we present later). Thus using this measure reduces the amount
of spurious regridding that occurs, which in turn reduces errors introduced by that
process. Where it starts to grow in some region, this generally reflects a decrease in
the local dynamical timescales and thus physically motivated regridding.
     A disadvantage of using these more arbitrary criteria over error tagging is that
convergence testing is more challenging - one must ensure that similar regions are
refined at the appropriate resolutions in the convergence runs, which necessitates
tuning of the threshold at each different base resolution. Depending on the regridding
condition, halving the threshold τR , for example, may not result in double the
resolution being applied. Nevertheless, if one ensures that the regions of most physical
significance have an appropriate increase in refinement, convergence can usually be
demonstrated, as we show below.
     In order to obtain convergent results and use resolution most efficiently in a
physical problem, it is often helpful to implement rules to enforce that given regions
are refined for a given amount of time at least to a given level. Whilst this may seem
to go against the spirit of AMR, it is easy to implement within that formalism as a
secondary condition, and is often required to avoid excessive or insufficient tagging in
very dynamical cases. For example, when one is not interested in resolving outgoing
scalar radiation, one may choose to suppress regridding above a particular level outside
of a particular radius. In the opposite sense, we often enforce extra regridding over the
extraction surfaces for the Weyl scalars, to ensure that they have sufficient resolution
and that noise is not introduced from grid boundaries crossing the spheres.
  18 Imposing simply that ∂ χ (without the factor of ∆x) is higher that some threshold results in
                           i
unlimited regridding, since one does not reduce the local gradient in a variable by refinement, only
the difference across the cell.
Lessons for adaptive mesh refinement in numerical relativity                                       18

                                                                   Pr

                                                    y          P        Pt   S2
                                                                             α
                             M1                                     M2
                        α                                  x
                       S1   Pt        P

                                 Pr
                                               d


                 Figure 2. Schematic illustration of the parameters characterizing the BH binary
                 configurations under consideration: the mass ratio q = M2 /M1 > 1, the initial
                 separation d, the initial tangential linear momentum Pt , the initial inward radial
                 linear momentum Pr , the dimensionless spin of each black hole χi = |Si |/Mi2 and
                 the angle of the spin in the orbital plane α relative to the outward radial direction
                 of the initial BH positions.


     Several examples of the application of these criteria to black-hole binary inspirals
and matter field evolutions are presented in the following, sections 4 and 5. These two
examples cover the main considerations when using AMR in NR codes. Spacetimes
with singularities have particular requirements related to the resolution of the horizons.
Furthermore, in dynamical matter spacetimes achieving an optimum frequency of
regridding can be crucial in obtaining convergence. In the matter case we focus
on an isolated real scalar (axion) star, which provides a very good test of AMR
capabilities. In particular, it tests the ability to resolve stably oscillating matter
configurations without excessive gridding and ungridding, and to follow the dynamical
timescales of gravitational collapse, which are the key challenges in many simulations
of fundamental fields in NR, including the modeling of cosmic strings, inflationary
spacetimes and exotic compact objects. Fully AMR techniques are also likely to create
significant challenges for high-resolution shock capturing, but we leave this topic for
future investigations.

4. Binary black-hole simulations with adaptive mesh refinement

In this section, we demonstrate the efficacy of some of the techniques discussed in
section 3 in the context of BH binaries. To do this, we select a representative
sample of BH binary configurations, analyze the accuracy of the resulting gravitational
waveforms and compare the results obtained with GRChombo to that obtained with
a more conventional moving boxes style mesh refinement code, Lean [14].
     Before we present our results, we first provide details of the explicit tagging
criteria used in our GRChombo simulations and the methods we use to analyze and
compare our results.

4.1. Methods
We consider three different BH binary configurations with the parameters provided in
table 1 and illustrated schematically in figure 2. All simulations include an inspiral,
merger and ringdown.
     The first configuration consists of two equal-mass non-spinning BHs with a
quasicircular inspiral lasting about 10 orbits; this configuration is labeled q1-d12
(for mass ratio q = 1 and distance d ≈ 12). The parameters were computed in order
Lessons for adaptive mesh refinement in numerical relativity                                      19


                  Table 1. A list of the parameter values (cf. figure 2) for the BH binary
                  configurations simulated in this work. M = M1 + M2 denotes the total black
                  hole mass of the spacetime.

                   Label   q    d/M        Pt /M         Pr /M            χi    α     Reference
                  q1-d12   1    12.21358   0.08417       5.10846 × 10−4   0     -     [112]
                  q2-d10   2    10         0.08566       0                0     -     [113]
                  q1-s09   1    11.01768   0.075         0                0.9   30◦   [114]



to minimize the initial eccentricity of the simulation using standard techniques [112].
     The second configuration involves two BHs with mass ratio 2 : 1. The inspiral is
about 6 orbits and is approximately quasicircular. This is one of the configurations
simulated in the lq1:2 sequence of [113]19 . Here we label this configuration q2-d10
(for mass ratio q = 2 and distance d = 10).
     The final configuration consists of a mildly eccentric inspiral of two equal-mass
highly-spinning BHs. The spins lie in the plane as shown in figure 2, which is the
“superkick” configuration [115–117]. Here, the quantity we analyze is the gravitational
recoil of the remnant BH. This configuration is taken from the sequence simulated in
[114] and we label it q1-s09 (for mass ratio q = 1 and spin χ = 0.9).

4.1.1. GRChombo setup and tagging criteria For the GRChombo simulations of
the BH binary configurations in table. 1, we use the CCZ4 equations (13-18) with
the default damping parameters (27) (note that in code units, M = 1). We use the
moving puncture gauge (28-31) with the default lapse parameters (29) and the shift
parameters b1 = 1, b2 = 3/4, M η = 1 for q1-d12 and q1-s09 and b1 = 1, b2 = 3/4,
M η = 3/4 for q2-d10. For q1-d12 and q2-d10, we use reflective BCs along one
boundary to impose bitant symmetry (i.e. symmetry across the equatorial plane) and
Sommerfeld BCs for all other boundaries. Following sections 3.2, 3.3 and 3.5, we use
a tagging criterion of the following form

                                C = max (Cχ , Cpunc , Cex ) ,                                 (50)

where the quantities on the right-hand side are defined below. Note that we use the
value +∞ to denote a large value that always exceeds the threshold τR .
 (i) Cχ tags regions in which the derivatives of the conformal factor χ become steep.
                                                               max
     It is the dominant criterion for the intermediate levels lex  ≤ l < lmax − 3, where
      max
     lex is the maximum extraction level (see item (iii) below). It is given by
                                             sX
                                                           2
                                  Cχ = ∆xl        (∂i ∂j χ) ,                       (51)
                                                   i,j


    where ∆xl is the grid spacing on refinement level l.
(ii) Cpunc includes parts of the tagging criterion that use the location of the punctures.
     It is the dominant criterion on the finest three levels and is comprised of two parts,
     Cinsp and Cmerg that are used depending on the coordinate distance between the
  19 Note that, in this paper, GRChombo was not used to evolve this configuration.
Lessons for adaptive mesh refinement in numerical relativity                                   20

     punctures sp = |xp,1 − xp,2 | as follows:
                            
                            Cinsp ,
                                               sp ≥ M + b
                   Cpunc = max(Cinsp , Cmerg ), 10−3 ≤ sp < M + b                            (52)
                                                sp < 10−3 ,
                            
                              Cmerg ,
                            

     where M = M1 + M2 is the sum of the individual BH masses, b is a buffer
     parameter (cf. section 3.2), and 10−3 is a choice in the cutoff for the distance
     between the punctures sp which determines when the merger has completed. The
     inspiral criterion is given by
                              
                                                      min(lmax −l−1,2)
                              +∞, if %1 < (M1 + b)2
                                                                      ,
                     Cinsp =                          min(l     −l−1,2)
                                     or %2 < (M2 + b)2      max
                                                                         ,       (53)
                              
                                0,  otherwise,
                              

     where %i is the “max” or “infinity” norm (46) of the coordinate position vector
     relative to puncture i. Similarly, the merger criterion is given by
                              (
                                +∞, if % < (M + b)2min(lmax −l−1,2) ,
                     Cmerg =                                                    (54)
                                0,      otherwise,

      where % is the max-norm (46) of the coordinate position vector relative to the
      center of mass x = (M1 xp,1 + M2 xp,2 )/M .
(iii) Cex ensures the Ψ4 extraction spheres are suitably well resolved. It is the
                                               max
      dominant tagging criterion for 0 ≤ l < lex   and is given by Cex = maxi {Cex,i },
      where i labels the extraction spheres and
                                 (
                                   +∞, if r < 1.2rex,i and l < lex,i ,
                         Cex,i =                                                 (55)
                                   0,    otherwise,

     where rex,i and lex,i are the radius and level of the ith extraction sphere and
      max
     lex  = maxi lex,i . The factor of 1.2 is present to add a 20 % buffer radius around
     the extraction spheres in order to reduce the effect of spurious reflections off the
     refinement level boundaries.
A summary of the grid configuration parameters is given in table 2.

4.1.2. Comparison code: Lean The Lean code [14] is based on the Cactus
computational toolkit [8] and uses the method of lines with fourth-order Runge-Kutta
time stepping and sixth-order spatial stencils. The Einstein equations are implemented
in the form of the Baumgarte-Shapiro-Shibata-Nakamura-Oohara-Kojima (BSSNOK)
formulation [118–120] with the moving-puncture gauge [3, 4] (cf. equations (28-31)).
The Carpet driver [10] provides mesh refinement using the method of “moving
boxes.” For the non-spinning binary configurations q1-d12 and q2-d10, we use bitant
symmetry to reduce computational expense, whereas configuration q1-s09 is evolved
without symmetries. The computational domains used for these simulations are
characterized by the parameters listed in table 3. The domain comprises a hierarchy
of lmax +1 refinement levels labeled from l = 0, . . . lF , . . . , lmax , with grid spacing given
by (37). Before applying the symmetry, for l ≤ lF each level consists of a single fixed
Lessons for adaptive mesh refinement in numerical relativity                                     21


                  Table 2. GRChombo grid parameters for the configurations in table 1 There
                  are (lmax + 1) refinement levels and the coarsest level has length (without
                  symmetries applied) L. The grid spacing on the finest level is ∆xlmax and the
                  minimum number of cells in the buffer regions between consecutive refinement
                  level boundaries is nB . The regrid threshold for the tagging criterion (50) is τR
                  and the the BH buffer parameter is b.

                   Configuration       lmax       L/M      ∆xlmax /M   nB     τR         b/M
                      q1-d12 low       9          1024     1/80        20     0.016      0.7
                  q1-d12 medium        9          1024     1/96        24     0.0133     0.7
                     q1-d12 high       9          1024     1/128       32     0.01       0.7
                      q2-d10 low       7           512     1/88        48     0.01       0.467
                  q2-d10 medium        7           512     1/104       52     0.00923    0.467
                     q2-d10 high       7           512     1/112       56     0.00857    0.467
                      q1-s09 low       7           512     1/64        16     0.02       0.7
                  q1-s09 medium        7           512     1/96        24     0.0133     0.7
                     q1-s09 high       7           512     1/112       28     0.0114     0.7



                  Table 3. Lean grid parameters for the configurations in table 1. There are
                  (lmax + 1) levels of which the first (lF + 1) comprises a single box that covers
                  both BHs with the remaining levels consisting of two separate box components
                  that cover each BH separately. The half-width of the coarsest level is R0 and the
                  half-width of a single component on the finest level is Rlmax . The grid spacing
                  on the finest level for the three resolutions used in the convergence analysis is
                  ∆xlmax .

                  Configuration    lmax       lF     R0 /M     Rlmax /M     ∆xlmax /M
                        q1-d12     9          5      512       1/2          1/64, 1/96, 1/128
                        q2-d10     8          4      256       1/3          1/84, 1/96, 1/108
                        q1-s09     8          3      256       1            1/80, 1/88, 1/96



cubic grid of half-length Rl = R0 /2l , and for lF < l ≤ lmax , each level consists of two
cubic components of half-length Rl = 2lmax −l Rlmax centered around each BH puncture.
We adopt this notation for consistency with that used to describe GRChombo. This
translates into the more conventional Lean grid setup notation (cf. [14]) as

                (R0 , . . . , 2−lF R0 ) × (2lmax −lF −1 Rlmax , . . . , Rlmax ), ∆xlmax .
              
                                                                                          (56)

 A CFL factor of 1/2 is used in all simulations, and apparent horizons are computed
with AHFinderDirect [121, 122].
    For all our BH evolutions, with Lean and GRChombo, the initial data are
constructed with the TwoPunctures spectral solver [85].

4.1.3. Gravitational wave analysis One of the most important diagnostics from our
simulations is the GW signal which we compute from the Weyl scalar Ψ4 . For
GRChombo, the calculation of Ψ4 is explained in Appendix A and technical details of
the extraction procedure can be found in section 2.2.4. For Lean, details can be found
in [14]. Below, we describe further analysis we have performed in order to compare
the gravitational wave output from each code.
Lessons for adaptive mesh refinement in numerical relativity                          22

    We start with the multipolar decomposition of the Weyl scalar,
                                     ∞
                                     X   `
                                         X
                                                       `m
                              Ψ4 =              −2 Y        ψ`m .                   (57)
                                     l=2 m=−`

Next, we translate to the gravitational-wave strain h according to

                                 Ψ4 = ḧ = −ḧ+ + i ḧ×                             (58)

which gives us the strain multipoles as ḧ+                       ×
                                          `m = −Re(ψ`m ) and ḧ`m = Im(ψ`m ). To
avoid spurious drift resulting from numerical inaccuracies, we perform the necessary
integrations in time in the Fourier domain [123]. We then rewrite the strain modes in
terms of their amplitude and phase
                                                        
                                                      φ
                           − h+       ×      A
                               `m + ih`m = h`m exp ih`m ,                       (59)

where multiples of 2π are added to hφ`m appropriately in order to minimize the
difference between consecutive data points.
     The radiated quantities derived from Ψ4 are affected by two main error sources;
the discretization error due to finite resolution and an uncertainty arising from
the extraction at finite radii instead of null infinity. We determine the former by
conducting a convergence analysis of the quantities extracted at finite radius. In order
to determine the second error contribution, we compute a given radiated quantity f
at several finite extraction radii and extrapolate to infinity by fitting a polynomial in
1/r of the form
                                              N
                                             X fn,N (u)
                                 fN (u, r) =            .                           (60)
                                             n=0
                                                   rn
Here, r is the coordinate radius and u = t − r∗ denotes the retarded time evaluated
with the tortoise coordinate
                                                  r
                              r∗ = r + 2M ln        −1 .                            (61)
                                                 2M
We uniformly observe that time shifts in terms of r∗ result in slightly better alignment
of wave signals extracted at different coordinate radii r. If we take f0,N (u) as our
estimate of the extrapolated quantity, we then estimate the error  in our result from
r = rex by computing
                           f,rex ,N = |f (u, rex ) − f0,N (u)| .                    (62)
Typically, and unless stated otherwise, we set N = 1 and drop the N subscripts.
Our total error budget is then given by the sum of the discretization and extraction
uncertainties.
     We quantify the agreement between the two codes’ results in the context of
GW analysis by computing the overlap following the procedure of [124, 125]. In the
following, we restrict our analysis to the dominant (2,2) quadrupole part of the signal
and drop the subscript “` = 2, m = 2”. Before computing the overlap, we extrapolate
the strain to infinity using the procedure explained above.
     Given the power spectral density Sn (f ) of a detector’s strain noise as a function
of frequency f , the inner product of two signals g, h on the space of waveforms is
Lessons for adaptive mesh refinement in numerical relativity                                      23

given by20                                  (Z                               )
                                                    ∞
                                                        g̃ ∗ (f )h̃(f )
                             hg|hi := 4Re                               df       ,              (63)
                                                0           Sn (f )
where the Fourier transform is defined by
                                      Z ∞
                            g̃(f ) :=     g(t)e−2πif t dt.                                      (64)
                                             −∞

We next define the overlap of the two signals as the normalized inner product
maximized over shifts ∆t, ∆hφ in time and phase,

                                                             hg|hi
                                ρ(g, h) := max p                             .                  (65)
                                            ∆hφ ,∆t        hg|gihh|hi

The quantity 1 − ρ(g, h) then provides a measure for the discrepancy between the two
waveforms, analogous to the mismatch introduced as a measure for signal-to-noise
reduction due to model imperfections in GW data analysis [126, 127].
     For q1-s09, we instead analyze the convergence of the linear momentum radiated
in GWs in the form of the BH recoil velocity or kick. First we compute the radiated
momentum Prad using equation (7) of [113] and then compute the recoil velocity–
which must lie in the z-direction by symmetry–using v = −Pzrad /Mfin . Since the
radiated momentum can be written in terms of a sum, with each term involving
several multipolar amplitudes ψ`m (equation (40) in [128]), analyzing this quantity
has the benefit of additionally indirectly comparing the agreement of higher order
multipoles (i.e. ` > 2) between the codes.

4.2. Results
For each configuration in table 1, we have performed three simulations at different
resolutions with both GRChombo and Lean in order to calibrate their accuracy
which we discuss below. The respective grid configurations are given in tables 2 and
3.
     For the first configuration q1-d12 of an equal-mass binary, we show the
convergence analysis in figure 3 with the analysis for GRChombo on the left and
for Lean on the right. For Lean, we observe convergence of about fourth order in the
amplitude and between fifth and sixth order in the phase of the quadrupole mode h22
of the strain (59). For GRChombo we observe convergence of about second order in
the amplitude and about fourth order in the phase of the same mode. We note that,
as mentioned in [113], higher resolutions were required with GRChombo in order to
enter the convergent regime.
     By comparison with a Richardson extrapolation, we estimate the discretization
errors in the amplitude and phase of the finest resolution simulations from both codes
as follows. Excluding the early parts of the signal dominated by “junk” radiation and
the late part of the ringdown which is dominated by noise, we obtain a discretization
                 A
error of ∆hA22 /h22 . 1 % in the amplitude assuming fourth order convergence for Lean
and second order convergence for GRChombo. Up to the late ringdown where the
   20 We use in our calculation one-sided, as opposed to two-sided, spectral power densities, i.e. we

only consider non-negative frequencies, hence the factor 4 in (63).
          Lessons for adaptive mesh refinement in numerical relativity                                             24


10 - 2                                                             10 - 1
                                                                             10-2
                                                                   10 - 2
10 - 3                                                                       10-3

                                                                        -3          - 20   0   20
                                                                   10
10 - 4                            10-3
                                                                   10 - 4
                                  10-4
     -5
10                                10-5
                                                                   10 - 5
                                  10-6
                                         - 20   0   20

10 - 6                                                             10 - 6
-0.2
                                                                    2.5
-0.3                                                                2.0

-0.4                                                                1.5

                                                                    1.0
-0.5
                                                                    0.5
-0.6
                                                                    0.0
 0.4                                                         200    0.4                                                     200

 0.3                                                         150    0.3                                                     150

 0.2                                                         100    0.2                                                     100

 0.1                                                         50     0.1                                                     50

 0.0                                                         0      0.0                                                     0
  -2000       -1500     -1000      -500                  0           -2000            -1500         -1000   -500        0


                          (a)                                                                        (b)

                                                                                                             ×
                           Figure 3. Convergence of the quadrupole mode of the strain h22 = −h+       22 + ih22
                           calculated from the values of Ψ4 extracted for configuration q1-d12 at rex = 120 M
                           for both GRChombo with finest grid resolutions ∆xlmax = M/80, M/96 and
                           M/128 (a) and Lean with finest grid resolutions ∆xlmax = M/64, M/96 and
                           M/128 (b). Top panels: Convergence of the amplitude hA           22 = |h22 |.   The
                           difference between the higher resolution results is rescaled according to fourth
                           and fifth order convergence for Lean and according to second and third-order
                           convergence for GRChombo. In each case, the inset shows an interval around
                           the peak amplitude. Middle panels: Convergence of the phase hφ      22 = Arg(h22 ).
                           The difference between the higher resolution results is rescaled according to fifth
                           and sixth order convergence for Lean and third and fourth order convergence for
                           GRChombo. Bottom panels: For reference we plot the amplitude hA          22 and the
                           phase hφ22 of the highest resolution waveform   on the same  time axis. For  the two
                           lower resolution waveforms from each code, we have time-shifted each of them
                           in order to maximize the overlap (cf. (65)) with the highest resolution waveform.
                           ∆t = 0 corresponds to the maximum in hA    22 for the highest resolution waveform.




          phase becomes inaccurate, we estimate the phase error is ∆hφ22 ≤ 0.15 assuming sixth
          order convergence for Lean and fourth order convergence for GRChombo.
               Following the procedure in section 4.1.3, we estimate the error in the phase, due
          to finite-radius extraction, is hφ ,120M . 0.4, and, in the amplitude is hA
                                                                                      22 ,120M
                                                                                               /hA
                                                                                                 22 .
                                            22
          8 % (although this steadily decreases towards . 2% near merger) for both codes. Here
          we have ignored the early part of the signal where the amplitude is dominated by the
          “junk” radiation up to u = 300M .
Lessons for adaptive mesh refinement in numerical relativity                                   25

                                                                           10 - 2
                      -1
                 10
                                                                           10 - 3
                      -2
                 10
                                                                           10 - 4
                      -3
                 10
                                                                           10 - 5
                      -4
                 10
                                                                           10 - 6
                 10 - 5
                   -2000       -1500       -1000        -500           0



                 Figure 4. The relative and absolute difference between the GRChombo and
                 Lean outputs for the amplitude and phase of h22 respectively from the simulation
                 of configuration q1-d12. In both cases, the data comes from the simulations with
                 finest grid spacing ∆xlmax = M/128 with Ψ4 extracted at rex = 120M . As for the
                 convergence plots in figure 3, the time has been shifted in order to maximize the
                 overlap (cf. (65)) between the two waveforms and ∆t = 0 at the peak in hA,Lean
                                                                                           22    .



      We next directly compare the results of the two codes by computing the relative
                                                                                φ
difference in the amplitude hA 22 and the absolute difference in the phase h22 which is
shown in figure 4. Again, ignoring the early part of the signal and the late ringdown,
the relative difference in the amplitudes is . 1 %, consistent with the individual error
estimates from the two codes. The discrepancy in phase remains O(10−3 ) or smaller
throughout the inspiral, merger and early ringdown–well within the error estimates of
each code.
      For the first asymmetric BH binary configuration, q2-d10, we proceed in the
same way. We study the convergence in analogy to figure 3. Ignoring again the
contamination at early times, we obtain third-order convergence in the amplitude and
fifth-order convergence in the phase for Lean. For GRChombo, we obtain fourth
order convergence in the amplitude and mild overconvergence of about eighth order in
the phase21 . This leads to uncertainty estimates of ∆hA     A
                                                        22 /h22 . 2.5 % in the amplitude
         φ
and ∆h22 . 0.25 in the phase for both codes.
      The error due to finite-radius extraction in the amplitudes is hA  22 ,86.7M
                                                                                    /hA
                                                                                      22 .
10 % in the early inspiral decreasing down to . 2 % in the late inspiral, and in the
phase is hφ ,86.7M ∼ 0.5 for both codes.
            22
      In figure 5, we display as a function of the total mass M the discrepancy
1 − ρ (where ρ is the overlap given by (65)) between the GRChombo and Lean
waveforms for both q1-d12 and q2-d10, with the spectral noise density Sn (f ) given
by (i) the updated Advanced LIGO sensitivity design curve (aLIGODesign.txt in
[129]) and (ii) the zero detuned, high power noise curve from the Advanced LIGO
anticipated sensitivity curves (ZERO_DET_high_P.txt in [130]). For q1-d12, the
figure demonstrates excellent agreement of the two waveforms for the entire range
M = 10 . . . 200 M with a discrepancy 1 − ρ ≈ 0.03 % or less, whereas for q2-d10, the
agreement is not quite as strong but nevertheless demonstrates very good consistency
with a discrepancy 1 − ρ ≈ 0.7 % or less. The larger difference for q2-d10 compared
  21 We assume fourth order convergence for our GRChombo phase error.
Lessons for adaptive mesh refinement in numerical relativity                                 26

                10 - 2




                10 - 3




                10 - 4
                         20   40   60    80   100   120   140    160   180   200



                Figure 5. The discrepancy 1 − ρ between the (`, m) = (2, 2) mode of the
                gravitational wave signal from the q1-d12 (10 orbits, non-spinning, equal mass)
                and q2-d10 (6 orbits, non-spinning, 2 : 1 mass ratio) BH binary configurations
                simulated with Lean and GRChombo. For q1-d12, we use the simulation with
                resolution ∆xlmax = M/128 for both codes and for q2-d10, we use the simulation
                with resolution ∆xlmax = M/96 for both codes. For each configuration, we show
                the difference computed with the updated Advanced LIGO sensitivity design curve
                (aLIGODesign.txt in [129]) and the zero detuned, high power noise curve from the
                Advanced LIGO anticipated sensitivity curves (ZERO_DET_high_P.txt in [130]).


to q1-d12 may be attributed to the slightly lower resolutions employed for this
configuration, especially near the smaller BH. To put these numbers into context,
Lindblomet al. [127] estimate that a mismatch of 3.5 % would result in a reduction in
the GW event detection rate by about 10 %.
     Our final BH binary features asymmetry in the form of non-zero spins. This
time, we focus on the BH recoil velocity v calculated from the linear momentum
radiated in GWs, and the analysis is shown in figure 6. From the plots, we can see
that Lean exhibits convergence between third and fourth order, whilst GRChombo
exhibits convergence between fourth and fifth order. We illustrate our estimate of the
total error for each code in figure 7. Here, the error bands—around the curve from
the highest resolution simulation in each case—correspond to the difference with the
Richardson extrapolated curve assuming fourth-order convergence plus the estimated
error due to finite-radius extraction (about 1.5 % + 2 % for Lean and 0.5 % + 3 % for
GRChombo). This total error is about 3.5 % for both codes.
     As is not uncommon, the convergence orders obtained from numerical relativity
simulations can be fickle due to the various ingredients in the codes with differing
orders of accuracy which can dominate in certain regimes. This inherent complexity
makes it difficult to attribute the difference in convergence orders we obtain between
the two codes and we therefore do not attempt to do so.

5. Comparing tagging criteria using axion stars

In order to demonstrate the application of our techniques to problems with matter
fields and dynamically varying length scales, we consider the evolution of a single
axion star—a compact object composed of a real scalar bosonic field. We analyze the
  Lessons for adaptive mesh refinement in numerical relativity                                    27


  200
                                                          30
    0
-200                                                      20

-400                                                      10
-600
                                                           0
-800
                                                         -10
-1000

 3000                                                 3000


 2000                                                 2000


 1000                                                 1000


    0                                                      0
           100       125         150         175                  100         125         150           175


                   (a)                                                       (b)

                   Figure 6. Convergence plots for the accumulated linear momentum radiated from
                   configuration q1-s09 for GRChombo with finest grid resolutions ∆xlmax = M/64,
                   M/96 and M/112 (a) and for Lean with finest grid resolutions ∆xlmax = M/80,
                   M/88 and M/96 (b). This is shown in the form of the BH recoil velocity in the
                   bottom panels. For both codes, the radiated linear momentum is calculated from
                   the extracted Ψ4 values at rex = 90M , and the extrapolated curve corresponds
                   to a Richardson extrapolation assuming fourth order convergence. In the top
                   panels, we show the difference between the results from different resolutions with
                   rescalings according to third and fourth order convergence for Lean and according
                   to fourth and fifth order convergence for GRChombo.

                      3700


                      3600


                      3500


                      3400


                      3300
                         140           150         160           170          180



                   Figure 7. The accumulated radiated linear momentum at the end of the
                   highest resolution simulations of configuration q1-s09 from each code. The linear
                   momentum is shown in the form of the BH recoil velocity and the error bands show
                   our estimate of the total error coming from both discretization and finite-radius
                   effects.


  evolution of a star that is stable on the timescale of the simulation, as well as one in
Lessons for adaptive mesh refinement in numerical relativity                                      28


                  Table 4. GRChombo grid parameters for axion star configurations using
                  different tagging criteria. There are (lmax + 1) refinement levels and the coarsest
                  level has length (without symmetries applied) L. The grid spacing on the coarsest
                  level is ∆x0 and the minimum number of cells in the buffer regions between
                  consecutive refinement level boundaries is nB . The regrid thresholds for the
                  different tagging criteria are given by τR . We consider two cases; a stable axion
                  star (fa = 1) and an unstable collapse to a BH (fa = 0.05), with µ = ma c/~ = 1
                  in code units.
                  fa     Tagging    lmax      µL      µ∆x0     nB    τR
                  1.0    Ham        3          512      4       8    0.1
                  1.0    Ham        3          512      2      16    0.05
                  1.0    Ham        3          512      1      32    0.025
                  1.0    Trunc      3          512      4       8    0.0625
                  1.0    Trunc      3          512      2      16    3.91 x 10−3
                  1.0    Trunc      3          512      1      32    2.44 x 10−4
                  0.05   Ham        8         1024      4       8    0.1
                  0.05   Ham        8         1024    2.67     12    0.067
                  0.05   Trunc      8         1024      4       8    0.001
                  0.05   Trunc      8         1024    2.67     12    2.96 x 10−4



which the self-interaction is increased in order to trigger gravitational collapse to a
BH. As discussed previously, this simple example tests many of the key requirements
in using AMR to evolve fundamental fields coupled to gravity, in particular, the
ability to follow stable oscillations and to adapt to changing dynamical timescales.
Similar considerations apply, for example, to cosmological spacetimes, cosmic strings
and collisions of exotic compact objects.
     We demonstrate the use of two effective tagging criteria; first, tagging by the
magnitude of terms in the Hamiltonian constraint (70), and second, by the numerical
truncation error between refinement levels (48).

5.1. Methods
5.1.1. Setup We consider the evolution of two different axion star configurations.
Axion stars are quasi-equilibrium configurations of a self-gravitating real scalar field φ
[131] that is subject to a periodic self-interaction potential V (φ). A canonical potential
is
                               V (φ) = µ2 fa2 [1 − cos (φ/fa )] ,                     (66)
where this form arises as a result of the spontaneously broken U (1) Peccei-Quinn
symmetry and subsequent “tilting” of the potential due to instanton effects [132, 133].
The decay constant fa quantifies the symmetry breaking scale and determines the
strength of the scalar field self-interactions (their strength for a given central amplitude
is inversely related to fa ) and µ = ma c/~ is an inverse length scale related to the scalar
mass22 ma . Axion stars on the main stability branch are characterized by their central
amplitude φ0 or equivalently their ADM mass MADM ∼ µ−1 . They have a physical
size R (defined as the radius containing 99 % of the total mass) that is approximately
inversely related to their ADM mass, and thus a useful descriptor is their compactness
C = MADM /R. Axion stars with C ∼ 1/2 are highly relativistic and may form BHs if
they collapse or collide. For ma ∼ 10−14 eV, they are of a mass and size comparable to
  22 In Planck units one can write µ = m       2
                                           a /MPl , where MPl is the Planck mass.
Lessons for adaptive mesh refinement in numerical relativity                                   29

solar mass BHs, and thus potentially of astrophysical interest. Further details related
to the setup used here can be found in [95, 106], and a useful general review of axion
physics is provided in [134].
     The equation of motion for the scalar field φ is given by the Klein-Gordon equation
for a real scalar field minimally coupled to gravity
                                                  dV
                                     ∇ µ ∇µ φ −      = 0,                                    (67)
                                                  dφ
and the system is completed with the Z4 equations (1) for the metric components. To
construct localised, quasi-equilibrium oscillatory (axion star) solutions, we solve the
Einstein-Klein-Gordon (EKG) system of equations with a harmonic field ansatz and
appropriate boundary conditions [131, 135].
      Unlike the case of complex scalar boson stars, for axion star solutions the metric
components gµν also oscillate in time, with energy being transferred between the
matter and curvature terms in the Hamiltonian constraint [106]. This makes them
challenging targets for dynamical refinement; simple criteria based solely on matter
field gradients will fail to achieve a stable grid structure, as the gradients change over
time even in the quasi-stable case. If the gradients are close in value to a tagging
threshold, frequent regridding will occur, which introduces errors.
      The stability of the axion star solution comes from the balance of its tendency to
disperse due to gradient pressure from spatial field derivatives, with the tendency to
collapse due to its energy density. The relative strengths of these effects determines
whether the axion star remains stable, disperses through scalar radiation or collapses
to a black hole when perturbed. In particular, if the self-interaction scale fa is too
low, this can cause the axion star to collapse to a BH [98]. In the last case, a key AMR
challenge is determining tagging criteria that progressively track the axion star collapse
without triggering too frequent regridding from the more rapid field oscillations.
      We consider two cases, both with central amplitude φ0 = 0.020 and µMADM =
0.4131:
 (i) An axion star with weak self-interactions (fa = 1)23 , where the scalar field and
     metric oscillate over time in a localized configuration that is stable over time
     periods much longer than that of the simulation. We would ideally like the
     refinement to remain constant, despite the oscillations of the fields.
(ii) An unstable configuration where we increase the attractive self interaction by
     reducing the self interaction scale to fa = 0.05, such that the axion star is
     destabilized and undergoes collapse to a BH. We need the mesh refinement to
     follow this process sufficiently rapidly, but without excessive regridding.
    To evolve this system in GRChombo, the EKG equation (67) is decomposed into
two first order equations in the 3+1 formulation

         ∂t φ = β i ∂i φ + αΠ,                                                               (68)
                                                                         
                 i         ij                              ij k        dV
         ∂t Π = β ∂i Π + αγ (∂i ∂j φ + ∂i φ∂j α) + α KΠ − γ Γij ∂k φ −      ,                (69)
                                                                       dφ
and added to the CCZ4 evolution scheme (13-18). The initial data are set up as in
the previous study [98] using the numerically obtained axion star profile for an m2 φ2
  23 The decay constant f is dimensionless in geometric units as used here; to obtain its value in
                         a
Planck units one simply multiplies by the Planck mass MPl .
Lessons for adaptive mesh refinement in numerical relativity                        30

potential [131, 135, 136]. We choose the initial hypersurface such that φ = 0 and
hence V (φ) = 0 everywhere. The Hamiltonian constraint is thereby satisfied for both
the V = m2 φ2 and the axion potential (66) cases. Furthermore, if we impose the
extrinsic curvature Kij = 0, the momentum constraint is trivially satisfied and all
the dynamical information is encoded in the kinetic term of the field Π. The system
is evolved in the moving puncture gauge using the default 1+log parameters (29)
for the lapse evolution equation (28) with the exception of a1 = 0 and the default
Gamma-driver shift parameters for (30) and (31) with η = µ.

5.1.2. Tagging criteria We demonstrate the suitability of two different tagging
methods for tracking the axion star evolution in both the stable and unstable cases.
In the case of collapse to a BH, for both tagging methods, the threshold τR must
be chosen such that the apparent horizon is covered entirely by the finest refinement
level, as discussed in section 3.2. In our case, we choose a maximum refinement level
lmax = 8, which covers up to µr ≥ 0.5 > µMADM .
     The first tagging criterion we consider is based on physical quantities in the
simulation, as outlined in Section 3.5. We choose the absolute sum of the terms in the
Hamiltonian constraint Habs (49), setting the criterion
                                       C(i) ≡ Habs                                 (70)
in the tagging indicator function (38).
     We also show the efficacy of truncation error tagging, outlined in section 3.4.
We choose the variables f as defined in (47) to be χ, K, φ and π, as these capture
the information in the Hamiltonian constraint H. We use the tagging criterion (48),
explicitly             q
               C(i) =    (τl,χ (i))2 + (τl,K (i))2 + (τl,φ (i))2 + (τl,π (i))2 ,   (71)
where τl,f (i) is defined by (47) and we have set the normalizing factor Lf = 1 for all
f.

5.1.3. Diagnostics and convergence testing We perform convergence tests using
several key physical quantities from the evolution. The first quantity is the L2 norm
of the Hamiltonian constraint violations (33) ||H||2 over a coordinate volume V
                                         sZ
                                 ||H||2 =           d3 x H2 .                      (72)
                                                V

For the case of a stable axion star, in order to exclude the constraint violation at
the outer boundaries, we choose V to be the volume enclosed by a sphere of fixed
coordinate radius rout , Brout , with a center that coincides with that of the star:
                                        V = Brout .                                (73)
In the case of an unstable axion star that collapses to a BH, we furthermore excise
the volume enclosed by a smaller sphere of fixed coordinate radius rin < rout with the
same center in order to exclude the constraint violations near the puncture that arises
after the collapse. The radius rin is chosen such that the sphere will lie within the
apparent horizon once it is formed. This means that
                                    V = Brout \ Brin .                             (74)
