                                                                A LOW-RANK PROJECTOR-SPLITTING INTEGRATOR
                                                                     FOR THE VLASOV–POISSON EQUATION
                                                                             LUKAS EINKEMMER∗‡ AND CHRISTIAN LUBICH∗

                                              Abstract. Many problems encountered in plasma physics require a description by kinetic equations, which are posed in
                                          an up to six-dimensional phase space. A direct discretization of this phase space, often called the Eulerian approach, has many
                                          advantages but is extremely expensive from a computational point of view. In the present paper we propose a dynamical low-
                                          rank approximation to the Vlasov–Poisson equation, with time integration by a particular splitting method. This approximation
                                          is derived by constraining the dynamics to a manifold of low-rank functions via a tangent space projection and by splitting
                                          this projection into the subprojections from which it is built. This reduces a time step for the six- (or four-) dimensional
                                          Vlasov–Poisson equation to solving two systems of three- (or two-) dimensional advection equations over the time step, once in




arXiv:1801.01103v2 [math.NA] 9 Jun 2018
                                          the position variables and once in the velocity variables, where the size of each system of advection equations is equal to the
                                          chosen rank. By a hierarchical dynamical low-rank approximation, a time step for the Vlasov–Poisson equation can be further
                                          reduced to a set of six (or four) systems of one-dimensional advection equations, where the size of each system of advection
                                          equations is still equal to the rank. The resulting systems of advection equations can then be solved by standard techniques
                                          such as semi-Lagrangian or spectral methods. Numerical simulations in two and four dimensions for linear Landau damping,
                                          for a two-stream instability and for a plasma echo problem highlight the favorable behavior of this numerical method and show
                                          that the proposed algorithm is able to drastically reduce the required computational effort.

                                             Key words. Dynamical low-rank approximation, projector-splitting integrator, Vlasov–Poisson equation.


                                              1. Introduction. Many physical phenomena in both space and laboratory plasmas require a kinetic
                                          description. The typical example of such a kinetic model is the Vlasov–Poisson equation

                                                                      ∂t f (t, x, v) + v · ∇x f (t, x, v) − E(f )(x) · ∇v f (t, x, v) = 0
                                                                                                                                                                   (1.1)
                                                                                           Z
                                                                      ∇ · E(f )(x) = − f (t, x, v) dv + 1,              ∇ × E(f )(x) = 0,

                                          which models the time evolution of electrons in a collisionless plasma in the electrostatic regime (assuming
                                          a constant background ion density). Equation (1.1) has to be supplemented with appropriate boundary and
                                          initial conditions. The particle-density function f (t, x, v), where x ∈ Ωx ⊂ Rd and v ∈ Ωv ⊂ Rd (with spatial
                                          dimension d ≤ 3), is the quantity to be computed.
                                               In most applications, the primary computational challenge stems from the fact that the equation is
                                          posed as an evolution equation in an up to six-dimensional phase space. Thus, direct discretization of
                                          the Vlasov–Poisson equation on a grid requires the storage of O(n2d ) floating point numbers, where n is
                                          the number of grid points per direction. This has been, and in many cases still is, prohibitive from a
                                          computational point of view.
                                               Consequently, particle methods are widely used in many application areas that require the numerical
                                          solution of kinetic models. Particle methods, such as the particle-in-cell approach, only discretize the physi-
                                          cal space x (but not the velocity space v). The v-dependence is approximated by initializing a large number
                                          of particles that follow the characteristic curves of equation (1.1). This can significantly reduce the compu-
                                          tational cost and has the added benefit that particles congregate in high-density regions of the phase space.
                                          However, particle methods suffer from numerical noise that only decreases as the square root in the number
                                          of particles. This is, in particular, an issue for problems where the tail of the distribution function has to be
                                          resolved accurately. For a detailed discussion the reader is referred to the review article [54].
                                               As an alternative, the entire 2d-dimensional phase space can be discretized. This Eulerian approach has
                                          received significant attention in recent years. Due to the substantial increase in computational power, four-
                                          dimensional simulation can now be performed routinely on high performance computing (HPC) systems. In
                                          addition, some five and six-dimensional simulations (usually where in one direction a small number of grid
                                          points is sufficient) have been carried out. Nevertheless, these simulations are still extremely costly from a
                                          computational point of view. Consequently a significant research effort has been dedicated to improving both

                                             ∗ Mathematisches Institut, Universität Tübingen, Auf der Morgenstelle 10, D–72076 Tübingen, Germany.                 Email:
                                          {einkemmer,lubich}@na.uni-tuebingen.de
                                             ‡ Department of Mathematics, University of Innsbruck, Austria

                                                                                                        1
the numerical algorithms used (see, for example, [9, 15, 13, 19, 23, 30, 46, 49, 50, 53, 3, 7, 52, 5, 6]) as well as
the corresponding parallelization to state of the art HPC systems (see, for example, [51, 12, 2, 35, 42, 11, 8]).
     The seminal paper [3] introduced a time-splitting approach. This approach has the advantage that the
nonlinear Vlasov–Poisson equation can be reduced to a sequence of one-dimensional advection equations (see,
for example, [18, 20, 14]). Splitting schemes that have similar properties have been proposed for a range of
more complicated models (including the relativistic Vlasov–Maxwell equations [52, 5], drift-kinetic models
[23, 7], and gyrokinetic models [22]). This is then usually combined with a semi-Lagrangian discretization
of the resulting advection equations. A semi-Lagrangian approach has the advantage that the resulting
numerical method is completely free from a Courant–Friedrichs–Lewy (CFL) condition.
     Nevertheless, all these methods still incur a computational and storage cost that scales as O(n2d ). Thus,
it seems natural to ask whether any of the dimension reduction techniques developed for high-dimensional
problems are able to help alleviate the computational burden of the Eulerian approach. To understand
why it is not entirely clear if such an approach could succeed, we will consider the following equation (with
x, v ∈ R)

                                         ∂t f (t, x, v) + v ∂x f (t, x, v) = 0.

This is just the one-dimensional Vlasov–Poisson equation (1.1) without the nonlinear term. If the initial
                            2
value f0 (x, v) = cos(kx)e−v /2 with k ∈ R is imposed, then the exact solution can be easily written down as
                                                                            2
                                        f (t, x, v) = cos(k(x − vt)) e−v /2 .                                 (1.2)

From this expression we see that, as the system evolves in time, the wave number in the v-direction is given
by kt. In particular, we have k∂vm f (t, ·, ·))k ∝ (kt)m which implies that, even though the solution is infinitely
often differentiable, smaller and smaller scales appear in phase space. This phenomenon is referred to as
filamentation and in many problems a reasonable resolution of these small scale structures is important to
obtain physically meaningful results.
     A specific problem for sparse-grid approximations is that mixed derivatives (between x and v, but
perhaps even more problematic between different v-directions in a multidimensional setting) can be huge.
Nevertheless, sparse-grid techniques have been considered for the Vlasov–Poisson equation [34, 10, 24]. A
further challenge for these methods is that evaluating the particle-density function (which is required for
semi-Lagrangian methods) can be expensive.
     Despite these drawbacks, sparse grids can be advantageous in some situations. For example, in [34] first
a tensor product decomposition in the x- and v-directions is applied. The remaining d-dimensional problems
are then approximated using a sparse grid. For Landau damping in four dimensions this scheme was able to
reduce the required memory by approximately a factor of 10 and the run time by a factor of 2. On the other
hand, it is somewhat worrying that, as was shown in the cited work, instabilities can develop if not enough
degrees of freedom are used. Furthermore, it is well known that sparse grids do not resolve Gaussians very
well. This is a problem for kinetic simulations as the steady state is usually a linear combination of Gaussians.
In the previously mentioned work, this deficiency is remedied by explicitly incorporating a Gaussian into the
numerical method (a so-called δf scheme). However, this approach does not work very well in cases where
the particle density significantly deviates from this form.
     We now turn to the alternative approach taken in this paper, which appears to be novel for kinetic
equations. Computing numerical solutions of high-dimensional evolutionary partial differential equations by
dynamical low-rank approximation has, however, been investigated extensively in quantum dynamics; see,
in particular, [45, 44] for the MCTDH approach to molecular quantum dynamics in the chemical physics
literature and [36, 37, 4] for a mathematical point of view to this approach. Some uses of dynamical low-rank
approximation in areas outside quantum mechanics are described in [48, 28, 43, 47]. In a general mathematical
setting, dynamical low-rank approximation has been studied in [31, 32, 40, 1]. A major algorithmic advance
for the time integration was achieved with the projector-splitting methods first proposed in [39] for matrix
differential equations and then developed further for various tensor formats in [37, 38, 25, 29, 41]. In the
present paper we will adapt such methods to the Vlasov–Poisson equation.
     For the Vlasov–Poisson equation, low-rank approximation to the solution is an interesting option for a
                                                           2
number of reasons. First, the solution of our toy problem, given in equation (1.2), can be readily written as
                                                                                        2
                          f (t, x, v) = (cos(kx) cos(kvt) + sin(kx) sin(kvt)) e−v /2 .

Thus, the linear part of the equation can be represented exactly with rank two. While this property is lost
once we consider the full Vlasov–Poisson equation, it still gives some indication that at least certain types
of filamentation can be handled efficiently by the numerical method based on a low-rank approximation.
Second, the typical kinetic equilibria formed by linear combination of Gaussians can be very efficiently
represented by a low-rank structure. This is in stark contrast to the sparse-grid approach (as has been
discussed above).
     Recently, in [33] a low-rank numerical algorithm for the Vlasov–Poisson equation has been suggested
that first discretizes the problem in time and space. This is done using the common technique of splitting in
time and then applying a spline based semi-Lagrangian scheme to the resulting advection equations. Each
step of such an algorithm can then be written as a linear combination of low-rank approximations. To avoid
that the rank grows during the numerical simulation a singular value decomposition (SVD) is then applied
to truncate the low-rank approximation (i.e., approximate it by a different low-rank representation with a
fixed rank).
     In the present work we consider a different approach to approximating the solution of the Vlasov–Poisson
equation by a low-rank representation. We constrain the dynamics of the Vlasov–Poisson equation to a
manifold of low-rank functions by a tangent space projection which is then split into its summands over a
time step, adapting the projector-splitting approach to time integration of [39]. This yields a sequence of
advection equations in a lower-dimensional space. Then an appropriate semi-Lagrangian scheme or even
Fourier-based techniques can be applied easily to obtain a numerical solution. This approach is first used
to obtain equations separately in x and in v, which reduces a 2d-dimensional problem to a sequence of
d-dimensional problems (this is the content of Section 2). If r denotes the chosen rank, then over a time step
one solves, one after the other,
       • a system of r advection equations in x (and computing 2dr2 + r integrals over Ωv ),
       • a system of r2 ordinary differential equations (and computing 2dr2 integrals over Ωx ),
       • a system of r advection equations in v.
This first-order scheme can be symmetrized to yield a second-order time-stepping scheme. If n degrees of
freedom are used in each coordinate direction in the full discretization, then the storage cost is reduced to
O(rnd ) from O(n2d ), and similarly for the number of arithmetic operations.
     If appropriate, the procedure can then be repeated in a hierarchical manner in order to reduce the
computations further to one-dimensional advection equations and one-dimensional integrals (this is the
content of Section 3). We have chosen a hierarchical Tucker format since the dimensionality at this point
in the algorithm is only d and this allows us to treat all coordinate directions in x and in v equally. The
algorithm adapts the projector-splitting integrator for low-rank Tucker tensors from [41].
     A noteworthy feature of the proposed numerical scheme is that it works entirely within the low-rank
manifold. No high-rank tensor needs to be formed and subsequently truncated. This helps to reduce storage
and computational cost. In addition, depending on the problem either the physical space or the velocity
space or both can be solved directly, while still maintaining the hierarchical low-rank approximation in the
other parts of the algorithm.
     Numerical simulations for linear Landau damping, a two-stream instability and a plasma echo problem
are presented in Section 4. There we show that it is possible to use a small rank to capture the physics of
these problems. The proposed numerical method thus substantially reduces the computational cost required
to perform the simulation.
    2. Description of the numerical algorithm. The goal of this section is to derive an algorithm that
approximates the solution of the Vlasov–Poisson equation (1.1) by a low-rank representation. To that end,
the approximation to the particle-density function f (t, x, v) is constrained to the following form:
                                                   r
                                                   X
                                   f (t, x, v) ≈           Xi (t, x)Sij (t)Vj (t, v),                    (2.1)
                                                   i,j=1
                                                             3
where Sij (t) ∈ R and we call r the rank of the representation. Note that the dependence of f on the phase
space (x, v) ∈ Ω ⊂ R2d is now approximated by the functions {Xi : i = 1, . . . , r} and {Vj : j = 1, . . . , r} which
depend only on x ∈ Ωx ⊂ Rd and v ∈ Ωv ⊂ Rd , respectively, and on the time t. In the following discussion
we always assume that summation indices run from 1 to r and we thus do not specify these bounds.
    Now, we seek an approximation to the particle-density function that for all t lies in the set
                                     X                                                                 
                      2                                                           2             2
         M = f ∈ L (Ω) : f (x, v) =       Xi (x)Sij Vj (v) with Sij ∈ R, Xi ∈ L (Ωx ), Vj ∈ L (Ωv ) .
                                          i,j

It is clear that this representation is not unique. In particular, we can make the assumption that hXi , Xk ix =
δik and hVj , Vl iv = δjl , where h·, ·ix and h·, ·iv are the inner products on L2 (Ωx ) and L2 (Ωv ), respectively.
We consider a path f (t) on M. The corresponding time derivative is denoted by f˙ and is of the form
                                           X                                       
                                      f˙ =      Xi Ṡij Vj + Ẋi Sij Vj + Xi Sij V̇j .                         (2.2)
                                          i,j


If we impose the gauge conditions hXi , Ẋj ix = 0 and hVi , V̇j iv = 0, then Ṡij is uniquely determined by f˙.
This follows easily from the fact that

                                                       Ṡij = hXi Vj , f˙ix,v .                                    (2.3)

We then project both sides of equation (2.2) onto Xi and Vj , respectively, and obtain
                                     X                          X
                                         Sij V̇j = hXi , f˙ix −   Ṡij Vj ,                                        (2.4)
                                           j                                 j
                                         X                                 X
                                                 Sij Ẋi = hVj , f˙iv −           Xi Ṡij .                        (2.5)
                                           i                                i

From these relations it follows that the Xi and Vj are uniquely defined if the matrix S = (Sij ) is invertible.
Thus, we seek an approximation that for each time t lies in the manifold
                                          X
             M = f ∈ L2 (Ω) : f (x, v) =      Xi (x)Sij Vj (v) with invertible S = (Sij ) ∈ Rr×r ,
                                                     i,j
                                                                                                    
                           Xi ∈ L (Ωx ), Vj ∈ L2 (Ωv ) with hXi , Xk ix = δik , hVj , Vl iv = δjl
                                   2



with the corresponding tangent space
                                      X                                                          
       Tf M = f˙ ∈ L2 (Ω) : f˙(x, v) =    Xi (x)Ṡij Vj (v) + Ẋi (x)Sij Vj (v) + Xi (x)Sij V̇j (v) ,
                                               i,j
                                                                                                              
                       with Ṡ ∈ Rr×r , Ẋi ∈ L2 (Ωx ), V̇j ∈ L2 (Ωv ), and hXi , Ẋj ix = 0, hVi , V˙j iv = 0 ,

where f is given by equation (2.1). Now, we consider the reduced dynamics of the Vlasov–Poisson equation
on the manifold M. That is, we consider for the approximate particle density (again denoted by f for ease
of notation)

                                       ∂t f = −P (f ) (v · ∇x f − E(f ) · ∇v f ) ,                                 (2.6)

where P (f ) is the orthogonal projector onto the tangent space Tf M, as defined above.
   We will consider the projection P (f )g for a moment. From equations (2.2)-(2.5) we obtain
                                  X                X                        X
                        P (f )g =   hVj , giv Vj −   Xi hXi Vj , gix,v Vj +   Xi hXi , gix .
                                   j                       i,j                                i
                                                                  4
Let us introduce the two vector spaces X = span {Xi : i = 1, . . . , r} and V = span {Vj : j = 1, . . . r}. Then
we can write the projector as follows


                                            P (f )g = PV g − PV PX g + PX g,                                           (2.7)

where PX is the orthogonal projector onto the vector space X, which acts only on the x-variable of g = g(x, v),
and PV is the orthogonal projector onto the vector space V , which acts only on the v-variable of g(x, v). The
decomposition of the projector into these three terms forms the basis of our splitting procedure (for matrix
differential equations this has been first proposed in [39]).
     We proceed by substituting g = v · ∇x f − E(f ) · ∇v f into equation (2.7). This immediately leads to a
three-term splitting for equation (2.6). More precisely, for the first-order Lie–Trotter splitting we solve the
equations

                                         ∂t f = −PV (v · ∇x f − E(f ) · ∇v f ) ,                                       (2.8)
                                         ∂t f = PV PX (v · ∇x f − E(f ) · ∇v f )                                       (2.9)
                                         ∂t f = −PX (v · ∇x f − E(f ) · ∇v f )                                        (2.10)

one after the other. In the following discussion we consider just the first-order Lie–Trotter splitting algorithm
with step size τ . The extension to second order (Strang splitting) is nearly straightforward and is presented
in Section 2.3.
    We assume that the initial value for the algorithm is given in the form
                                                      X
                                        f (0, x, v) =   Xi0 (x)Sij
                                                                0
                                                                   Vj0 (v).
                                                               i,j


First, let us consider equation (2.8). Since the set {Vj : j = 1, . . . , r} forms an orthonormal basis of V (for
each t), we have for the approximate particle density (again denoted by f )
                                  X                                            X
                    f (t, x, v) =   Kj (t, x)Vj (t, v), with Kj (t, x) =          Xi (t, x)Sij (t),        (2.11)
                                j                                                                    i


where Kj (t, x) is the coefficient of Vj in the corresponding basis expansion. We duly note that Kj is a
function of x, but not of v. We then rewrite equation (2.8) as follows
             X                           X
                 ∂t Kj (t, x)Vj (t, v) +   Kj (t, x)∂t Vj (t, v)
              j                             j
                                X                                                                                     (2.12)
                           =−           Vj (t, ·), v 7→ v · ∇x f (t, x, v) − E(f )(x) · ∇v f (t, x, v) v Vj (t, v).
                                 j


Note that the electric field is self-consistently determined according to equation (1.1). In practice this is done
by solving the Poisson problem −∆φ = ρ(f ) + 1 for the potential φ. The electric      R field is then determined
according to E = −∇φ. We discuss how the (electron) charge density ρ(f ) = − f (t, x, v) dv is computed
in terms of the low-rank approximation after stating the corresponding evolution equations (for each step in
the splitting algorithm).
     The solution of equation (2.12) is given by Vj (t, v) = Vj (0, v) = Vj0 (v) and
                                            X                                 X
                       ∂t Kj (t, x) = −             c1jl · ∇x Kl (t, x) +              c2jl · E(K)(t, x)Kl (t, x)     (2.13)
                                                l                                 l

with
                                        Z                                         Z
                               c1jl =           vVj0 Vl0 dv,             c2jl =            Vj0 (∇v Vl0 ) dv.
                                         Ωv                                           Ωv
                                                                     5
The latter is obtained by equating coefficients in the basis expansion. A very useful property of this splitting
step is that we have to update only the Kj , but not the Vj . We further note that c1jl and c2jl are vectors in
                                                                                         k;xm
Rd , since v and ∇v Vl0 are vector quantities. We denote the mth component of ckjl by cjl     .
     In the equation derived above we have written E(K) to denote that the electric field only depends on K
during the current step of the algorithm. We will now consider this point in more detail. The electric field
is calculated from the electric charge density
                                                        Z
                                        ρ(f )(t, x) = −     f (t, x, v) dv
                                                                    Ωv

as described above. Once the charge ρ is specified, the electric field is uniquely determined. For the purpose
of solving equation (2.13) we have the charge
                                                X             Z
                                    ρ(t, x) = −     Kj (t, x)     Vj0 (v) dv
                                                         j                    Ωv
                                                        X
                                                 =−          Kj (t, x)ρ(Vj0 ).
                                                         j


Thus, the electric field only depends on K = (K1 , . . . , Kr ), which explains our notation E(K).
    Both solving equation (2.13) and determining the electric field are problems posed in a d-dimensional
(as opposed to 2d-dimensional) space. Thus, we proceed by integrating equation (2.13) with initial value
                                                        X
                                          Kj (0, x) =       Xi0 (x)Sij
                                                                     0

                                                                    i

until time τ to obtain Kj1 (x) = Kj (τ, x). However, this is not sufficient as the Kj1 are not necessarily
orthogonal (a requirement of our low-rank representation). Fortunately, this is easily remedied by performing
a QR decomposition
                                                     X
                                           Kj1 (x) =    Xi1 (x)Sbij
                                                                 1

                                                                i


to obtain orthonormal Xi1 and the matrix Sbij1
                                               . Once a space discretization has been introduced, this QR
decomposition can be simply computed by using an appropriate function from a software package such as
LAPACK. However, from a mathematical point of view, the continuous dependence on x causes no issues.
For example, the modified Gram-Schmidt process works just as well in the continuous formulation considered
here.
    Second, we proceed in a similar way for equation (2.9). In this case both Vj0 and Xi1 are unchanged and
only Sij is updated. The corresponding evolution equation (which runs backward in time) is given by
                                                                                        X
                ∂t Sij (t) = Xi1 (x)Vj0 (v), (v · ∇x − E(S)(t, x) · ∇v )                          Xk1 (x)Skl (t)Vl0 (v) x,v
                                                                                            k,l
                             X
                                   c1jl · d2ik − c2jl · d1ik [E(S(t))]
                                                                         
                         =                                                   Skl (t)                                          (2.14)
                             k,l

with
                                       Z                                           Z
                          d1ik [E] =         Xi1 EXk1 dx,                d2ik =             Xi1 (∇x Xk1 ) dx,
                                        Ωx                                             Ωx

and E(S(t)) denotes the electric field corresponding to the charge density
                                                  X
                                      ρ(t, x) = −   Xi1 (x)Sij (t)ρ(Vj0 ).
                                                          i,j
                                                                6
Note that in this case the evolution equation depends neither on x nor on v. Since E and ∇x Xk1 are vector
quantities, we have coefficient vectors d1ik and d2ik in Rd . We now integrate equation (2.14) with initial value
            1                         0
Sij (0) = Sbij until time τ obtain Seij = Sij (τ ). This completes the second step of the algorithm.
     Finally, we consider equation (2.10). Similar to the first step we have
                                    X                                       X
                      f (t, x, v) ≈   Xi (t, x)Li (t, v),  with Li (t, v) =     Sij (t)Vj (t, v).
                                 i                                                        j

As before, it is easy to show that this time the Xi remain constant during that step. Thus, the Lj satisfy
the following evolution equation
                                       D                                  X              E
                       ∂t Li (t, v) = − Xj1 , (v · ∇x − E(L)(x, t) · ∇v )   Xk1 Lk (t, v)
                                                                                              x
                                                                                      k
                                     X                                      X
                                 =       d1ik [E(L(t, ·))] · ∇v Lk (t, v) −  (d2ik · v)Lk (t, v),         (2.15)
                                     k                                                k

where E(L(t, ·)) denotes the electric field that corresponds to the charge density
                                                    X
                                        ρ(t, x) = −    Xi1 (x)ρ(Li (t, ·)).
                                                         i

We then integrate equation (2.15) with initial value
                                                               X
                                                                         0
                                              Li (0, v) =              Seij Vj0 (v)
                                                                   j


up to time τ to obtain L1i (v) = Li (τ, v). Since, in general, the L1i are not orthogonal we have to perform a
QR decomposition
                                                        X
                                              L1i (v) =     1
                                                          Sij Vj1 (v)
                                                               j


to obtain orthonormal functions Vj1 and the matrix Sij
                                                    1
                                                       . Finally, the output of our Lie splitting algorithm is
                                                         X
                                         f (τ, x, v) ≈         Xi1 (x)Sij
                                                                       1
                                                                          Vj1 (v).
                                                         i,j

     To render this algorithm into a numerical scheme that can be implemented on a computer, we have to
discretize in space. In principle, it is then possible to integrate equations (2.13), (2.14), and (2.15) using
an arbitrary time stepping method. However, equations (2.13) and (2.15) share many common features
with the original Vlasov system. Therefore, employing a numerical method tailored to the present situation
can result in significant performance improvements. More precisely, we will consider fast Fourier based
techniques (Section 2.1) and a semi-Lagrangian approach (Section 2.2). Both of these schemes remove the
CFL condition from equations (2.13) and (2.15). Similar methods have been extensively used for direct
Eulerian simulation of the Vlasov equation (which is the primary motivation to extend them to the low-rank
algorithm proposed in this work).
     Before proceeding, however, let us briefly discuss the complexity of our algorithm. For that purpose we
choose to discretize both x and v using n grid points in every coordinate direction. The storage cost of our
numerical method is then O(nd r), compared to O(n2d ) for the Eulerian approach. Now, let us assume that
the cost of solving the evolution equations is proportional to the degrees of freedom (which is usually true
for semi-Lagrangian schemes and true up to a logarithm for spectral methods). In this case our low-rank
algorithm requires O(nd r) arithmetic operations for the evolution equations and O(nd r2 ) operations for
computing the integrals, compared to O(n2d ) for a direct simulation.

                                                               7
    2.1. Spectral method. In the framework of the classic splitting algorithm for the Vlasov–Poisson
equation (which goes back to [3]), spectral methods have long been considered a viable approach. This is
mainly due to the fact that once the splitting has been performed, the remaining advection equations can
be solved efficiently by employing fast Fourier transforms. Equations (2.13) and (2.15) are somewhat more
complicated, compared to the advection equations resulting from a direct splitting of the Vlasov–Poisson
equation, in that a nonlinear term is added. In addition, for equation (2.15) even the speed of the advection
depends on the electric field. However, since the advection coefficients are scalar quantities it is still possible
to apply Fourier techniques, as we will show below.
    We first consider equation (2.13). Performing a Fourier transform (denoted by F) in x yields
                                        X                        X
                                          c1jl · ik K̂l (t, k) +   c2jl · F (E(K)(·)Kl (t, ·)) .
                                                   
                      ∂t K̂j (t, k) = −
                                        β                              l


Forming the vectors K̂ = (K̂1 , . . . , K̂r ) and K = (K1 , . . . , Kr ) and defining F appropriately, we can write
this in matrix notation
                                      ˙
                                     K̂(t, k) = A(k)K̂(t, k) + F (K̂(t, ·))(k).                             (2.16)

The linear part is the only source of stiffness. For each k we have A(k) ∈ Rr×r which is a small enough
matrix to be handled by direct methods. Thus, an exponential integrator is easily able to integrate the linear
part exactly (which removes the CFL condition). For a first order scheme the exponential Euler method is
sufficient

                             K̂(τ, k) ≈ eτ A(k) K̂(0, k) + τ ϕ1 (τ A(k))F (K̂(0, ·))(k),

where ϕ1 (z) = (ez − 1)/z is an entire function. It should be noted that higher order methods have been
derived as well (see, for example, the review article [26]).
    Now, let us turn our attention to equation (2.15). Before this equation can be made amenable to Fourier
techniques, a further approximation has to be performed. Specifically, we freeze the electric field at the
beginning of the time step. That is, instead of equation (2.15) we solve the approximation
                                            X                       X
                             ∂t Li (t, v) =   d1ik · ∇v Lk (t, v) −  (d2ik · v)Lk (t, v)
                                                k                           k

with d1ik = d1ik (E(L(0, ·))). This still yields a first order approximation. We will show in Section 2.3 how
this technique can be improved to second order. Now, the advection speed is independent of L and we are
able to apply a Fourier transform in v which yields
                                            X                        X
                                              d1ik · ik L̂k (t, k) −   d2ik · F (vLk (t, ·)) .
                                                       
                            ∂t L̂i (t, k) =
                                            k                               k

This is in the form of equation (2.16) and can thus be handled by an exponential integrator in the same way
as is explained above.
    2.2. Semi-Lagrangian method. Semi-Lagrangian methods are widely employed to solve the Vlasov
equation. To a large part this is due to the fact that by performing a splitting in the different spatial and
velocity directions, only one-dimensional advection equations have to be solved. The projection operation
necessary for these class of methods can then be implemented easily and efficiently. In the present section
our goal is to show that an efficient semi-Lagrangian scheme can be derived for equations (2.13) and (2.15).
    We start with equation (2.13) and use the vector notation K = (K1 , . . . , Kr ). Then,

     ∂t K(t, x) = −c1;x1 ∂x1 K(t, x) − c1;x2 ∂x2 K(t, x) − c1;x3 ∂x3 K(t, x) + c2 · E(K)(t, x) K(t, x).
                                                                                              
                                                                                                        (2.17)

Applying a first order Lie splitting to equation (2.17), with initial value K(0, x) = K 0 (x), gives
                                     1;x1
                                            ∂x1 −τ c1;x2 ∂x2 −τ c1;x3 ∂x3
                      K(τ, ·) ≈ e−τ c           e           e               (K 0 + τ (c2 · E(K 0 ))K 0 ).
                                                                8
This can be extended trivially to second or higher order. The crucial part is the computation of
                                                            1;x1
                                           M (t, x) = e−tc         ∂x1
                                                                         M (0, x)
which is equivalent to the partial differential equation
                                          ∂t M (t, x) = −c1;x1 ∂x1 M (t, x).
Since c1;x1 is symmetric, there exists an orthogonal matrix T such that T c1;x1 T T = D, where D is a diagonal
matrix. All these computations can be done efficiently as c1;x1 ∈ Rr×r (i.e. we are dealing with small
matrices). We now change variables to M = T M and obtain
                                          ∂t M j (t, x) = −Djj ∂x1 M (t, x).
This is a one-dimensional advection equation with constants coefficients and can thus be treated with an
arbitrary semi-Lagrangian method. Once M (τ, x) is obtained the coordinate transformation is undone such
that we get Mj (τ, x) = T T M j (τ, x). Exactly the same procedure is then applied to the advection in the x2
and x3 direction.
     For equation (2.15) we proceed in a similar way. The main difference here is that we first freeze d1ik =
  1
dik (E(L(0, ·)) at the beginning of the step (as is explained in more detail in the previous section). This
leaves us with
                                           X                       X
                            ∂t Li (t, v) =   d1ik · ∇v Lk (t, v) −  (d2ik · v)Lk (t, v).
                                            k                              k

Since this equation is (almost) identical to equation (2.17) and d1;x1 , d1;x2 , and d1;x3 are symmetric, we can
apply the same algorithm.
     2.3. Second-order integrator. So far we have only considered the first order Lie splitting. However,
in principle it is simple to employ the second order Strang splitting. The main obstacle in this case is that
for both the Fourier approach (introduced in section 2.1) and the semi-Lagrangian approach (introduced
in section 2.2) it is essential that a further approximation is made when solving equation (2.15). More
specifically, the electric field E is assumed fixed during that step. Thus, a naive application of Strang
splitting would still only result in a first order method. However, in [17, 16] a technique has been developed
that can overcome this difficulty for methods of arbitrary order.
     A detailed account of the second order accurate scheme is given in Algorithm 1. From there it should
also be clear that no additional ingredients, compared to the first order scheme described in section 2, are
needed. The main point is that we use an embedded Lie scheme of step size τ /2 in order to determine an
electric field E 1/2 such that E 1/2 (x) ≈ E(f ( τ2 , ·))(x). Using E 1/2 in the middle step of the Strang splitting,
which approximates equation (2.15), yields a numerical method that is almost symmetric. Then composing
two Lie steps in opposite order yields a second order method.
     3. A hierarchical low-rank algorithm. The algorithm proposed in the previous section reduces a
2d-dimensional problem to a number of d-dimensional problems. However, if the solution under consideration
also admits a low-rank structure in Xi (t, x) and Vj (t, v), it is possible to further reduce the dimensionality
of the equations that need to be solved. To derive such an algorithm is the content of the present section.
We will first consider the four-dimensional case (d = 2). This is sufficient to elucidate the important aspects
of the algorithm. The algorithm for the six-dimensional (d = 3) case is stated in Section 3.2.
    3.1. The hierarchical low-rank algorithm in four dimensions. Once again we start from the
low-rank approximation
                                             X
                               f (t, x, v) ≈   Xi (t, x)Sij (t)Vj (t, v),                (3.1)
                                                      i,j

where x = (x1 , x2 ) ∈ Ωx ⊂ R , v = (v1 , v2 ) ∈ Ωv ⊂ R2 , and S ∈ Rr×r . In addition, we will now restrict Xi
                               2

and Vj to the low-rank representations
                                               X
                                 Xi (t, x) =      X1α (t, x1 )Ciαβ (t)X2β (t, x2 )                        (3.2)
                                                α,β
                                                            9
Algorithm 1 A second-order accurate low-rank algorithm for the Vlasov–Poisson equation.
Input: Xi0 , Sij
              0
                 , Vj0 (such that f (0, x, v) ≈ i,j Xi0 (x)Sij0
                                                                Vj0 (v))
                                                P
            2     5    1                                  2     5
                                                                  Vj1 (v))
                                                  P
Output: Xi , Sij , Vj (such that f (τ, x, v) ≈ i,j Xi (x)Sij
                                                                                         1
                                                P 0 0
 1: Solve equation (2.13) with initial value      i Xi Sij up to time τ /2 to obtain Kj .
                                                                   1
 2: Perform a QR decomposition of Kj1 to obtain Xi1 and Sij          .
                                                 1                                2
 3: Solve equation (2.14) with initial value Sij up to time τ /2 to obtain Sij      .
                                              1  2          0
 4: Compute the electric field E using Xi , Sij , and Vj .
 5: Compute d1ij using E.
                                                                                                      1/2
 6: Solve equation (2.15) with fixed d1ij and initial value
                                                               P 2 0
                                                                  j Sij Vj up to time τ /2 to obtain Li .
                                                  1/2
 7: Compute the electric field E 1/2 using Li           and Xi1 .
 8: Compute d1ij using E 1/2 .
 9: Solve equation (2.15) with the fixed d1ij and initial value                2    0                        1
                                                                        P
                                                                            j Sij Vj up to time τ to obtain Li .
                                                         3
10: Perform a QR decomposition of L1i to obtain Vj1 and Sij .
                                              3                             4
11: Solve equation (2.14) with initial value Sij up to time τ /2 to obtain Sij .
                                               1 4                             2
                                                  P
                                           i Xi Sij up to time τ /2 to obtain Kj .
12: Solve equation (2.13) with initial value
13: Perform a QR decomposition of Kj2 to obtain Xi2 and Sij
                                                          5
                                                            .


and
                                                  X
                                   Vj (t, v) =          V1α (t, v1 )Djαβ (t)V2β (t, v2 ),                          (3.3)
                                                  α,β

where C ∈ Rr×rx ×rx , D ∈ Rr×rv ×rv and rx and rv is the rank in the x- and v-direction, respectively. It is,
however, entirely reasonable for the Vlasov equation that, for example, a further low-rank structure is present
in velocity space but the same is not true in physical space. As an example, consider a plasma system, where
only weak kinetic effects are present. Traditionally, fluid models (such as magnetohydrodynamics and its
extensions) have been used to model such systems. However, this approach neglects kinetic effects altogether.
As an alternative the low-rank approach in this paper could be employed. Since the system is still close to
thermodynamic equilibrium, a further low-rank approximation can be employed in v. On the other hand, the
dynamics in x might not be accessible to such an approximation. In this case only the hierarchical low-rank
representation given in (3.3) would be used. This would leave equation (2.13) precisely as stated in Section
2, while equation (2.15) is replaced by the algorithm developed in this section.
    Fortunately, equations (2.13) and (2.15) are sufficiently similar that we only have to derive (and perhaps
more importantly, implement) the algorithm once. Thus, we will consider the following equation
                                         X                        X
                        ∂t Kj (t, x) = −    c1jl · ∇x Kl (t, x) −   c2jl · F (K)(x)Kl (t, x).
                                          l                             l

For solving equation (2.13) we simply set F (K) = −E(K). If we replace c1 and c2 by d1 and d2 , respectively,
replace the variable x by v, reverse the sign of the equation, and set F (K)(v) = v, then we obtain precisely
equation (2.15).
     In the following we transfer the algorithm proposed for time integration of Tucker tensors in [41] to the
current setting. The reader is encouraged to first look up [41] before entering into the thicket of formulas
presented in the following. Compared to the generic case in [41], there are important simplifications for the
problem under consideration, which even influence the representation of our low-rank approximation. In
fact, a Tucker representation for the order-three tensor Xj (t, x1 , x2 ) (for fixed t) would be given by
                                           X
                               Xj (t, x) =    Rlαβ (t)Alj (t)X1α (t, x1 )X2β (t, x2 )
                                              l,α,β

and not by equation (3.2). The algorithm would then proceed by updating A, X1 , X2 , and finally the core
tensor R. However, in the present setting A is artificial in the sense that we can always go back to the
                                                              10
representation in equation (3.2) by setting
                                                          X
                                           Cjαβ (t) =                 Rlαβ (t)Alj (t).
                                                           l

If we want to express this in the Tucker format, we can insert an identity matrix
                                              X
                                  Xj (t, x) =    Clαβ (t)δlj Xα1 (x1 )Xβ2 (x2 ).
                                                 l,α,β

It is straightforward to show that if we apply the projection splitting algorithm in [41] to a Tucker tensor in
this form, the first step leaves both C and A (in this case the identity) unchanged. Thus, we can proceed
with the algorithm and work directly in the representation given by (3.2). In the following we will consider
the first-order Lie–Trotter splitting. We assume that the initial value is given in the form
                                                      X
                                        f (0, x, v) =   Xi0 (x)Sij
                                                                0
                                                                   Vj0 (v)                                (3.4)
                                                          i,j

with
                                                   X
                                       Xi0 (x) =          0
                                                         X1α (x1 )G0iαβ X2β
                                                                         0
                                                                            (x2 ).                                (3.5)
                                                   α,β
                                                     P
Since the evolution equation is formulated for Kj = i Xi Sij , we then compute
                                              X
                                    Kj0 (x) =      0
                                                 X1α       0
                                                     (x1 )Cjαβ  0
                                                               X2β (x2 ),
                                                   α,β

where
                                                           X
                                                  0
                                                 Cjαβ =                   G0iαβ Sij
                                                                                 0
                                                                                    .
                                                                  i

    Step 1: The first step of the algorithm updates X1 and C. First, we perform a QR decomposition
                                                 X
                                            0              0
                                          Cjαβ =     Qjξβ Rαξ
                                                               ξ

and set
                                                          X
                                                                            0
                                           Wjξ (x2 ) =                Qjξβ X2β (x2 ).                             (3.6)
                                                              β


In an actual implementation, the QR decomposition can be computed by defining A ∈ R(r·rx )×rx such that
              0
A(j+βr)α = Cjαβ  and then computing the QR decomposition of A. Now, let us define
                                                         X
                                        Mα (t, x1 ) =             X1ξ (t, x1 )Rξα (t),
                                                          ξ

for which we give an evolution equation. These Mα in fact play the same role as the Kj did in the algorithm
of Section 2. The equation derived is as follows:
                                 XD      X                                     X                E
              ∂t Mα (t, x1 ) = −   Wiα ,      c1ik · ∇x + c2ik · F (M )(x1 , ·)   Mξ (t, x1 )Wkξ
                                                                                                             x2
                                 i           k                                                  ξ
                                X                                 X
                                     a1αξ ∂x1 Mξ (t, x1 ) −                 a2αξ + a3αξ (x1 ) Mξ (t, x1 ),
                                                                                             
                           =−                                                                                     (3.7)
                                 ξ                                    ξ

                                                               11
where
                               X 1;x                                                        X 1;x
                      a1αξ =    cik 1 hWiα , Wkξ ix2 ,                             a2αξ =    cik 2 hWiα , ∂x2 Wkξ ix2 ,
                                i,k                                                          i,k

and
                                                       X
                                        a3αξ (x1 ) =             c2ik · hWiα , F (M )(x1 , ·)Wkξ ix2 .
                                                           i,k


Note that a1 , a2 , and a3 can be easily expressed in terms of Q and inner products over functions involving
X2β . For a1αβ the orthonormality relation of the X2β can be used to obtain a simpler formula that can be
computed without performing any integrals:
                                                  X 1;x
                                           a1αξ =     cik Qiαβ Qkξβ .
                                                                   i,k,β


For a2 we have
                                           XX 1;x       X                          
                               a2αξ =         cik 2 Qiαβ            0
                                                             Qkξη hX2β        0
                                                                       , ∂x2 X2η i x2
                                           k,β     i                               η


which requires O(nR2 ), with R = max (r, rx , rv ), arithmetic operations to compute the integrals and then
O(R4 ) operations to obtain the entries a2αξ . A similar formula can be given for a3 but we postpone this
discussion until later (where we will also discuss the low-rank representation of the electric field in more
detail).
    Now, we solve equation (3.7) with initial value
                                                      X
                                                           0       0
                                        Mα (0, x1 ) =    X1ξ (x1 )Rξα
                                                                               ξ


until time τ and obtain Mα1 (x1 ) = Mα (τ, x1 ). Then a QR factorization
                                                     X
                                         Mα1 (x1 ) =      1
                                                        X1ξ       1
                                                            (x1 )Rξα
                                                                           ξ

                                                 1
is performed to obtain orthonormal functions X1ξ    and the matrix R1 .
    Now, an evolution equation for R is derived to become
                            XD           X                          X 1                    E
                                1
                 Ṙξα (t) =    X1ξ Wiα ,    c1ik · ∇x + c2ik · F (R)    X1ξ0 Rξ0 α0 (t)Wkα0
                                                                                                                                     x
                                i                      k                                           ξ 0 ,α0
                              X                                      X                               X
                          =             b1ξξ0 Rξ0 α0 (t)a1αα0 +            Rξα0 (t)a2αα0 +                     Bξαξ0 α0 Rξ0 α0 (t)       (3.8)
                              ξ 0 ,α0                                 α0                             ξ 0 ,α0

with
                                                                                   X
                 b1ξξ0 = hX1ξ
                           1         1
                              , ∂x1 X1ξ 0 ix1 ,                  Bξαξ0 α0 =               c2ik · hX1ξ
                                                                                                   1              1
                                                                                                      Wiα , F (R)X1ξ 0 Wkα0 ix .

                                                                                    i,k

Let us note that Bξαξ0 α0 is defined by a two-dimensional integral. However, it is, of course, possible to also
obtain a low-rank approximation for F (R). Only two cases are relevant here. First, F (x) = x which trivially
is a low-rank approximation of rank 1. Second, F (R) = −E(R). Then, the electric field E is approximated
by
                                                    X
                                      E(x1 , x2 ) =   E1µ (x1 ) ◦ E2µ (x2 ),
                                                                     µ
                                                                           12
where the component-wise product is written as ◦ and µ = 1, . . . , rE ; here rE is the rank used to represent
the electric field. Then
                                      X
                         Bξαξ0 α0 = −   c2ik hX1ξ
                                               1         1
                                                  , E1µ X1ξ 0 ix1 ◦ hWiα , E2µ Wkα0 ix2 ,                (3.9)
                                            i,k,µ


which only requires the evaluation of one-dimensional integrals. Nevertheless, evaluating equation (3.9)
naively requires O(R7 ) arithmetic operations (with R = max (r, rx , rE )), in addition to evaluating the
integrals. However, we can write
                                     X                        X
                        Bξαξ0 α0 = −      1
                                       hX1ξ        1
                                            , E1µ X1ξ 0 ix1 ·   c2ik hWiα , E2µ Wkα0 ix2
                                            µ                                  i,k


and evaluate the sums from right to left, which only requires O(R5 ) arithmetic operations.
                                                                   1                          2
    Now, we integrate equation (3.8) with initial value Rξα (0) = Rξα until time τ to obtain Rξα = Rξα (τ ).
From this we update C as
                                                   X
                                             1                2
                                           Cjαβ  =     Qjξβ Rαξ ,
                                                                  ξ

which completes the first step of the algorithm.
    Step 2: The second step proceeds in a similar manner, but updates X2 and C. First, we perform a
QR decomposition
                                                    X
                                              1             0
                                             Ciαβ =   Qiαη Rβη .
                                                                  η


The tensor Q and the matrix R0 obtained here are different from those in the first step, but for ease of
notation we do not use different symbols or extra superscripts. We define
                                                   X
                                     Nβ (t, x2 ) =   X2η (t, x2 )Rηβ (t)
                                                              η

for which we determine an evolution equation. These Nβ play the same role as the Lj did in the algorithm
of Section 2. The equation derived is as follows:
                                X     D       X                             X 1                   E
                                         1
             ∂t Nβ (t, x2 ) = −   Qiαβ X1α  ,     c1ik · ∇x + c2ik · F (N )   X1ξ Qkξη Nη (t, x2 )
                                                                                                                  x1
                              i,α                       k                                        ξ,η
                             X                                X
                                     h1βη ∂x2 Nη (t, x2 ) −                h2βη + h3βη (x2 ) Nη (t, x2 ),
                                                                                            
                        =−                                                                                             (3.10)
                                 η                                η

where
                                 X                                                   X
                        h1βη =           c1;x 2
                                          ik Qiαβ Qkαη ,                  h2βη =             Qiαβ Qkξη c1;x 1 1
                                                                                                        ik bαξ
                                 i,k,α                                             i,k,α,ξ

and
                                            X
                          h3βη (x2 ) =               Qiαβ Qkξη c2ik · X1α
                                                                       1                   1
                                                                          , F (N )(·, x2 )X1ξ x1
                                                                                                 .
                                           i,k,α,ξ


Equation (3.10) is integrated with initial value
                                                                  X
                                                                            0        0
                                                Nβ (0, x2 ) =              X2η (x2 )Rηβ
                                                                      η
                                                                  13
until time τ . We then set Nβ1 (x2 ) = Nβ (τ, x2 ) and perform a QR decomposition
                                                                              X
                                                                    Nβ1 =            1
                                                                                    X2η  1
                                                                                        Rηβ
                                                                              η

                                 1
to obtain orthonormal functions X2η   and the matrix R1 . Next, an evolution equation for R is obtained as
follows:
                    X     D           X                             X                               E
                              1  1                                      1
         Ṙηβ (t) =   Qiαβ X1α  X2η ,      c1ik · ∇x + c2ik · F (R)    X1α                      1
                                                                           0 Qkα0 β 0 Rη 0 β 0 X2η 0
                                                                                                                                  x1 ,x2
                       i,α                               k                                           α0 ,η 0 ,β 0
                       X                                      X                           X
                   =              d1ηη0 Rη0 β 0 (t)h1ββ 0 +          Rηβ 0 (t)h2ββ 0 +               Gηβη0 β 0 Rη0 β 0 (t)                    (3.11)
                       η 0 ,β 0                                β0                         η 0 ,β 0

with
                                                                        X
        d1ηη0 = hX2η
                  1         1
                     , ∂x2 X2η 0 ix2 ,             Gηβη0 β 0 =                    Qiαβ Qkα0 β 0 c2ik · hX1α
                                                                                                         1   1
                                                                                                            X2η         1
                                                                                                                , F (R)X1α   1
                                                                                                                          0 X2η 0 ix1 ,x2 .

                                                                      i,k,α,α0

We then integrate equation (3.11) with initial value R1 up to time τ and set Rηβ
                                                                              2
                                                                                 = Rηβ (τ ). We then update
the core tensor C as
                                                    X
                                              2               2
                                            Ciαβ  =     Qiαη Rβη .
                                                                              η

This completes the second step of the algorithm.
    Step 3: In the last step we update C and the matrix S. The tensor C is first updated by the following
evolution equation:
                           D          X                          X 1              E
                             1   1
              Ċiαβ (t) = − X1α X2β ,    c1ik · ∇x + c2ik · F (C)               1
                                                                   X1ξ Ckξη (t)X2η
                                                                                                                             x
                                                     k                                          ξ,η
                               X 1;x                  X 1;x                  X
                            =−  cik 1 b1αξ Ckξβ (t) −  cik 2 d1βη Ckαη (t) −   (c2ik · eαβξη )Ckξη (t),                                       (3.12)
                                      k,ξ                               k,η                                    k,ξ,η

where

                                                   eαβξη = hX1α X2β , F (C)X1ξ X2η ix .

We integrate equation (3.12) with initial value C 2 until time τ and set Ciαβ 3
                                                                                = Ciαβ (τ ). Now, we have
obtained the following representation
                                                     X
                               Kj (τ, x) ≈ Kj1 (x) =    1
                                                       X1α       3
                                                           (x1 )Cjαβ  1
                                                                     X2β (x2 ).
                                                                              α,β

This, however, is not yet sufficient, since in order to obtain an approximation in the form given by equation
(3.1), we have to perform a QR decomposition. If this is done naively, the complexity would scale as nd , with
n the number of grid points per direction, which is precisely what we want to avoid in the present setting.
However, since the X11 and X21 are already orthogonalized, we can compute a QR decomposition without
modifying X11 or X21 and without evaluating any integrals. This is accomplished, for example, by carrying
out the modified Gram-Schmidt process. To perform the Gram-Schmidt process, inner products and linear
combinations of the different Kj1 are required. However, since by orthogonality
                                                             X
                                       hKj1 , Kk1 ix =               3
                                                                    Cjαβ  3
                                                                         Ckξη   1
                                                                              hX1α    1
                                                                                   , X1ξ       1
                                                                                         ix1 hX2β    1
                                                                                                  , X2η ix2
                                                             αβξη
                                                             X
                                                                    3    3
                                                     =             Cjαβ Ckαβ                                                                  (3.13)
                                                             α,β

                                                                               14
and since
                                  X
                                                  +                              +
                   Kj1 + cKk1 =          1
                                        X1α (x1 )Cαβ  1
                                                     X2β (x2 )         with     Cαβ    3
                                                                                    = Cjαβ     3
                                                                                           + cCkαβ ,    (3.14)
                                  α,β


this can be done efficiently, as only operations on C have to be performed. The corresponding procedure is
shown in Algorithm 2 and requires R4 arithmetic operations. It is applied to the input Cjαβ
                                                                                         3
                                                                                            and results in
             4          1
the output Cjαβ and Sij (in an actual implementation this can be done in place, as is demonstrated by 2).
Thus, we finally obtain the low-rank representation
                                                           X
                                          f (0, x, v) =          Xi1 (x)Sij
                                                                         1
                                                                            Vj1 (v)
                                                           i,j


with
                                                    X
                                        Xi1 (x) =          1
                                                          X1α       4
                                                              (x1 )Ciαβ  1
                                                                        X2β (x2 ).
                                                    α,β


This is precisely the same form in which the initial value is provided, see equations (3.4) and (3.5). We then
can proceed to apply the corresponding procedure to update the quantities depending on velocity space.
                                                                                                      P
AlgorithmP2 The goal of the algorithm is to obtain Xi and SijPsuch that hXi , Xk ix = δik and Kj = i Xi Sij
                        1           1                                    1        1
with Xi = α,β X1α           Ciαβ X2β  . The input is such that Kj = α,β X1α Cjαβ X2β and consequently only C is
modified by the algorithm. This is accomplished using the modified Gram-Schmidt procedure and equations
(3.13) and (3.14).
Input: Cjαβ
Output: Sij , Cjαβ
 1: S = 0
 2: for j = 1, . . . , r do
 3:     for k = 1,P   . . . , j − 1 do
 4:        Skj = αβ Ckαβ Cjαβ
 5:        for α, β do
 6:            Cjαβ = Cjαβ − Skj Ckαβ
 7:        end for
 8:     end for
              qP
                                2
 9:     Sjj =          α,β Cjαβ
10:     for α, β do
11:        Cjαβ = Cjαβ /Sjj
12:     end for
13: end for


     We have not yet discussed how to solve the evolution equations derived in this section. Equations (3.7)
and (3.10) (which correspond to an advection in x1 and x2 , respectively) can be treated using the approach
outlined in sections 2.1 and 2.2. That is, we can employ a spectral method or a semi-Lagrangian scheme. In
fact, the present situation is simpler since the evolution equations only depend on a single variable. In fact,
the further splitting into the different coordinate axis, as described in section 2.2 for the semi-Lagrangian
approach, is not required in the present setting.
     Before proceeding let us discuss the complexity of the proposed hierarchical low-rank splitting scheme.
Solving the evolution equations (3.7) and (3.10) requires O(nR2 ) arithmetic operations and O(nR) storage,
where n is the number of grid points (per direction) and R = max(r, rx , rv , rE ). In addition, we have
to compute the coefficients which requires O(nR2 + R4 ) arithmetic operations. The storage cost of the
coefficients is O(nR2 + R4 ) and is dominated by a3 and h3 .
                                                             15
     3.2. The hierarchical low-rank algorithm in six dimensions. In this section we extend the hier-
archical low-rank approximation to the six-dimensional (d = 3) case. Since the derivation is very similar we
will only state the relevant evolution equations here. We start with the low-rank representation
                                                   X
                                     f (t, x, v) ≈   Xi (t, x)Sij (t)Vj (t, v),                       (3.15)
                                                                  i,j


where x = (x1 , x2 , x3 ) ∈ Ωx ⊂ R3 , v = (v1 , v2 , v3 ) ∈ Ωv ⊂ R3 , and S ∈ Rr×r . We now restrict to the
low-rank representation
                                        X
                            Xi (t, x) =   Ciαβγ (t)X1α (t, x1 )X2β (t, x2 )X3γ (t, x3 )              (3.16)
                                                α,β,γ

and
                                                 X
                                  Vj (t, v) =             Djαβγ (t)V1α (t, v1 )V2β (t, v2 )V3γ (t, v3 ),                       (3.17)
                                                α,β,γ


where C ∈ Rr×rx ×rx ×rx , D ∈ Rr×rv ×rv ×rv and rx and rv is the rank in the x- and v-direction, respectively.
We then consider the evolution equation
                                        X                        X
                       ∂t Kj (t, x) = −    c1jl · ∇x Kl (t, x) −   c2jl · F (K)(x)Kl (t, x),
                                                    l                                   l

which, depending on the choice of F , models either the update for Xi or Vj . Like in the previous section,
we start with the initial value
                                          X
                                Kj0 (x) =     0
                                            Cjαβγ   0
                                                  X1α       0
                                                      (x1 )X2β       0
                                                               (x2 )X3γ (x3 ).
                                                        α,β,γ

In the following we will divide the algorithm into four parts which correspond to the update of X1 and C,
the update of X2 and C, the update of X3 and C, and finally an update of C.
    Step 1: We perform a QR decomposition
                                                    X
                                             0                 0
                                            Cjαβγ =     Qjξβγ Rαξ
                                                                         ξ

and set
                                                                 X
                                                                               0        0
                                          Wjα (x2 , x3 ) =              Qjαβγ X2β (x2 )X3γ (x3 ).
                                                                  β,γ

Then we define
                                      X                                                                 X
                                                                                                             0        0
                      Mα (t, x1 ) =       X1ξ (t, x1 )Rξα (t),               with       Mα (0, x1 ) =       X1ξ (x1 )Rξα ,
                                      ξ                                                                 ξ

for which we obtain the one-dimensional evolution equation
                                      X                        X
                                        a1αξ ∂x1 Mξ (t, x1 ) −   a2αξ + a3αξ (x1 ) Mξ (t, x1 )
                                                                                  
                   ∂t Mα (t, x1 ) = −                                                                                          (3.18)
                                                ξ                                   ξ

with
                X 1;x                                            X  1;x                            1;x3
                                                                                                                                
       a1αξ =    cik 1 hWiα , Wkξ ix2 ,x3 ,             a2αξ =      cik 2 hWiα , ∂x2 Wkξ ix2 ,x3 + cik   hWiα , ∂x3 Wkξ ix2 ,x3
                i,k                                              i,k
                                                                         16
and
                                                       X
                                    a3αξ (x1 ) =             c2ik · hWiα , F (M )(x1 , ·, ·)Wkξ ix2 ,x3 .
                                                       i,k

This is solved up to time τ . For the resulting functions Mα (τ, x1 ) a QR decomposition is performed to obtain
                          1                      1
orthonormal functions X1α     and the matrix Rξα   :
                                                                          X
                                                                                    1        1
                                                     Mα (τ, x1 ) =                 X1ξ (x1 )Rξα .
                                                                              ξ

Then we consider the matrix evolution equation for R,
                             X                         X                 X
                  Ṙξα (t) =   b1ξξ0 Rξ0 α0 (t)a1αα0 +   Rξα0 (t)a2αα0 +   Bξαξ0 α0 Rξ0 α0 (t)                                            (3.19)
                                   ξ 0 ,α0                                α0                        ξ 0 ,α0

with
                                                                                  X
                     b1ξξ0 = X1ξ
                              1         1
                                 , ∂x1 X1ξ 0
                                             x1
                                                ,             Bξαξ0 α0 =                 c2ik · X1ξ
                                                                                                 1              1
                                                                                                    Wiα , F (R)X1ξ 0 Wkα0
                                                                                                                          x
                                                                                                                            .
                                                                                   i,k

With a low-rank representation of F (R), the three-dimensional integrals in the definition of Bξαξ0 α0 can
again be broken up into linear combinations of products of one-dimensional integrals. Equation (3.19) with
initial value R1 is then integrated up to time τ to obtain R2 = R(τ ). Finally we obtain
                                                     X
                                             1                 2
                                            Cjαβγ =     Qjξβγ Rαξ .
                                                                          ξ

      Step 2: We perform a QR decomposition
                                                                      X
                                                          1                              0
                                                         Cjαβγ =                  Qjαηγ Rβη ,
                                                                          η

where Q and R are different from those before, but nevertheless we use the same symbols for ease of notation.
We set
                                                   X
                                                               0
                                      Wjαβ (x3 ) =     Qjαβγ X3γ (x3 ).
                                                                          γ

Then we define
                                                                    X
                                                 Nβ (t, x2 ) =                X2η (t, x2 )Rηβ (t)
                                                                      η

for which we obtain the one-dimensional evolution equation
                                       X                        X
                    ∂t Nβ (t, x2 ) = −   h1βη ∂x2 Nη (t, x2 ) −  (h2βη + h3βη (x2 ))Nη (t, x2 )                                           (3.20)
                                                 η                                        η

with
           X                                                    X                                             X
  h1βη =           c1;x
                    ik hWiαβ , Wkαη ix3 ,
                        2
                                                     h2βη =               1;x1 1
                                                                         cik  bαξ hWiαβ , Wkξη ix3 +                  c1;x
                                                                                                                       ik hWiαβ , ∂x3 Wkαη ix3
                                                                                                                           3


           i,k,α                                               i,k,α,ξ                                        i,k,α

and
                                              X
                             h3βη (x2 ) =              c2ik · hX1α
                                                                1                           1
                                                                   Wiαβ , F (N )(·, x2 , ·)X1ξ Wkξη ix1 ,x3 .
                                             i,k,α,ξ
                                                                          17
Equation (3.20) is then solved with initial value
                                                                             X
                                                                                       0        0
                                                            Nβ (0, x2 ) =             X2η (x2 )Rηβ
                                                                                 η

                                                                                                     1      1
up to time τ . For the resulting Nβ (τ, x2 ) a QR decomposition is performed to obtain X2η             and Rηβ .
    Then we consider the matrix evolution equation for R,
                              X                            X                   X
                   Ṙηβ (t) =    b2ηη0 Rη0 β 0 (t)h1ββ 0 +   Rηβ 0 (t)h2ββ 0 +   Hηβη0 β 0 Rη0 β 0 (t)           (3.21)
                                         η 0 ,β 0                            β0                       η 0 ,β 0

with
                                                                        X
            b2ηη0 = hX2η
                      1         1
                         , ∂x2 X2η 0 ix2 ,              Hηβη0 β 0 =                  c2ik · hX1ξ
                                                                                              1   1
                                                                                                 X2η              1
                                                                                                     Wiξβ , F (R)X1ξ    1
                                                                                                                     0 X2η 0 Wkξ 0 β 0 ix .

                                                                       i,k,ξ,ξ 0


Equation (3.21) with initial value R1 is integrated up to time τ to obtain R2 . Finally, we obtain
                                                                          X
                                                               2                            2
                                                              Cjαβγ =                Qjαηγ Rβη .
                                                                             η


      Step 3: We perform a QR decomposition
                                                                          X
                                                               2                            0
                                                              Cjαβγ =                Qjαβζ Rγζ .
                                                                             ζ

Then we define
                                                                       X
                                                       Oγ (t, x3 ) =             X3ζ (t, x3 )Rζγ (t)
                                                                         ζ

for which we obtain the evolution equation
                                        X                        X
                     ∂t Oγ (t, x3 ) = −   e1γζ ∂x3 Oζ (t, x3 ) −  (e2γζ + e3γζ (x3 ))Oζ (t, x3 )                                               (3.22)
                                                        ζ                                  ζ

with
                 X                                                  X                                              X
       e1γζ =             c1;x3
                           ik Qiαβγ Qkαβζ ,              e2γζ =                1;x1 1
                                                                              cik  bαξ Qiαβγ Qkξβζ +                         c1;x 2 2
                                                                                                                              ik bβη Qiαβγ Qkαηζ
                i,k,α,β                                           i,k,α,ξ,β                                      i,k,α,β,η

and
                                              X
                          e3γζ (x3 ) =                 c2ik · hX1α X2β , F (O)(·, ·, x3 )X1ξ X2η ix1 ,x2 Qiαβγ Qkξηζ .
                                         i,k,α,ξ,β,η


Equation (3.22) is then solved with initial value
                                                                             X
                                                                                       0        0
                                                            Oγ (0, x3 ) =             X3ζ (x3 )Rζγ
                                                                                 ζ

                                                                                                            1      1
up to time τ . For the resulting Oγ (τ, x2 ) a QR decomposition is performed to obtain X3ζ                    and Rζγ .
    Then we consider the evolution equation for R,
                               X                              X                   X
                    Ṙζγ (t) =    b3ζζ 0 Rζ 0 γ 0 (t)e1γγ 0 +   Rζγ 0 (t)e2γγ 0 +   Gζγζ 0 γ 0 Rζ 0 γ 0 (t)             (3.23)
                                          ζ 0 ,γ 0                           γ0                       ζ 0 ,γ 0
                                                                              18
with
                                                       X
                                                                                                     1     1
  b3γζ 0 = (X3γ , ∂x3 X3ζ 0 ),     Gζγζ 0 γ 0 =                     c2ik · X1α
                                                                            1   1
                                                                               X2β  1
                                                                                   X3ζ         1
                                                                                       , F (R)X1α 0 X2β 0 X3ζ 0  Q    Q 0 0 0.
                                                                                                                x iαβγ kα β γ
                                                  i,k,α,β,α0 ,β 0


Equation (3.23) with initial value R1 is integrated up to time τ to obtain R2 . Finally we obtain
                                                    X
                                             3                 2
                                           Cjαβγ  =     Qjαβζ Rγζ .
                                                                      γ

    Step 4: The final step directly updates C. The corresponding evolution equation is
             X 1;x                   X 1;x                   X 1;x                   X
Ċiαβγ (t) =  cik 1 b1αξ Ckξβγ (t) +  cik 2 b2βη Ckαηγ (t) +  cik 3 b3γζ Ckαβζ (t) +   (c2ik · eαβγξηζ )Ckξηζ (t)
              k,ξ                        k,η                               k,ζ                     k,ξ,η,ζ
                                                                                                                          (3.24)
with
                                                1   1   1          1   1   1
                                     eαβγξηζ = X1α X2β X3γ , F (R)X1ξ X2η X3ζ x
                                                                                .

Equation (3.24) with initial value C 3 is then solved up to time τ to obtain C 4 . This completes a full time
step of algorithm. The output is
                                                X
                         Kj (τ, x) ≈ Kj1 (x) =        4
                                                    Cjαβγ   1
                                                          X1α       1
                                                              (x1 )X2β       1
                                                                       (x2 )X3γ (x3 ).
                                                           α,β,γ

At the end, a factorization into an orthogonalized tensor C and a matrix S is obtained as in Algorithm 2,
simply by adding a subscript γ to every appearance of α, β in that algorithm.
    4. Numerical results. In this section we show numerical results for the low-rank and the hierarchical
low-rank splitting algorithm. In both cases the spectral method described in section 2.1 is used. Numerical
results for linear Landau damping, for a two-stream instability and a plasma echo will be presented.
   4.1. Linear Landau damping. First, let us consider the classic two-dimensional Landau damping.
We set Ω = Ωx × Ωv = (0, 4π) × (−6, 6) and impose the initial value
                                                       1   2
                                          f0 (x, v) = √ e−v /2 (1 + α cos(kx)),
                                                       2π

where we have chosen α = 10−2 and k = 21 . In both the x- and v-direction periodic boundary conditions
are imposed. It can be shown by a linear analysis that the decay rate of the electric energy is given by
γ ≈ −0.153. The so obtained decay rate has been verified by a host of numerical simulations presented in
the literature. The numerical results obtained using the low-rank/FFT algorithm proposed in Section 2.1
are shown in Figure 4.1.
    We observe that choosing the rank r = 5 is sufficient to obtain a numerical solution which very closely
matches the analytic result. Although we see that the numerical method does not conserve energy up to
machine precision, the error is very small (on the order of 10−8 ). In addition, the errors in mass and in the
L2 norm are indistinguishable from machine precision.
    Next, we turn our attention to a four-dimensional problem. That is, we set Ω = (0, 4π)2 × (−6, 6)2 and
impose the initial value

                                                   1 −(v2 +w2 )/2
                             f0 (x, y, v, w) =       e            (1 + α cos(k1 x) + α cos(k2 y)),
                                                  2π
where we have chosen α = 10−2 and k1 = k2 = 21 . As before, periodic boundary conditions are chosen
for all directions. Although the problem is now set in four dimensions, the behavior of the electric energy
is almost identical to the two-dimensional problem. The numerical results obtained using the hierarchical
                                                                      19
  10 2
                            electric energy                                                                             error mass
                                                    r=5                                               r=5
                                                    r=10                                              r=10
  10 4                                              analytic rate (0.153)                             r=20

  10 6                                                                                    10 13

  10 8

  10 10                                                                                   10 14

  10 12

  10 14
                                                                                          10 15
  10 16
          0     20         40                  60   80                         100                0          20   40                   60   80                       100

                                error energy                                                                           error l2 norm
                                                                      r=5                 10 12       r=5
  10 8
                                                                      r=10                            r=10
                                                                      r=20                            r=20
  10 9
                                                                                          10 13
  10 10

  10 11                                                                                   10 14

  10 12

  10 13                                                                                   10 15

  10 14
          0     20         40                  60   80                         100                0          20   40                   60   80                       100


     Figure 4.1. Numerical simulations of linear Landau damping with the low-rank/FFT algorithm and various ranks are
shown (note that the plots for r = 10 and r = 20 in the top left figure are indistinguishable). The Strang splitting algorithm
with a time step size τ = 0.025 is employed. In the x-direction 64 grid points are used, while in the v-direction 256 grid points
are used.


                            electric energy                                                                             error mass
                                                                                          10 5
                                                    r, rx, rv = 5, 5, 5
  10 2                                              r, rx, rv = 10, 10, 10
                                                    r, rx, rv = 15, 15, 15                10 6
                                                    analytic rate (0.153)

  10 4                                                                                    10 7

                                                                                          10 8
  10 6
                                                                                          10 9

  10 8
                                                                                          10 10                                             r, rx, rv = 5, 5, 5
                                                                                                                                            r, rx, rv = 10, 10, 10
                                                                                                                                            r, rx, rv = 15, 15, 15
  10 10                                                                                   10 11
          0     20         40                  60   80                         100                0          20   40                   60   80                       100

  10 5
                                error energy                                                                           error l2 norm
                                                                                          10 5
                                                                                                                                            r, rx, rv = 5, 5, 5
                                                                                                                                            r, rx, rv = 10, 10, 10
  10 6                                                                                                                                      r, rx, rv = 15, 15, 15

                                                                                          10 6
  10 7

  10 8
                                                                                          10 7

  10 9

                                                      r, rx, rv = 5, 5, 5                 10 8
  10 10                                               r, rx, rv = 10, 10, 10
                                                      r, rx, rv = 15, 15, 15
          0     20         40                  60   80                         100                0          20   40                   60   80                       100


     Figure 4.2. Numerical simulations of four-dimensional linear Landau damping with the hierarchical low-rank/FFT
algorithm and various ranks are shown (note that the error in mass and energy is almost identical for all three configurations).
The Lie–Trotter splitting algorithm with a time step size τ = 0.00625 is employed. In the x-direction 64 grid points are used,
while in the v-direction 256 grid points are used. The L2 norm is only computed for every 40th time step.

                                                                                     20
                           electric energy                                                                      error mass
                                                                                         10 5
  10 2                                                r, rx, rv = 5, 5, 5
                                                      r, rx, rv = 10, 10, 10
  10 3                                                r, rx, rv = 15, 15, 15
                                                      r, rx, rv = 5, 15, 15              10 6

  10 4
                                                                                         10 7
  10 5

  10 6                                                                                   10 8

  10 7
                                                                                         10 9
                                                                                                                                    r, rx, rv = 5, 5, 5
  10 8                                                                                                                              r, rx, rv = 10, 10, 10
                                                                                                                                    r, rx, rv = 15, 15, 15
                                                                                         10 10                                      r, rx, rv = 5, 15, 15
  10 9
          0    10         20                  30   40                          50                0   10   20                   30   40                       50

                               error energy                                                                    error l2 norm
  10 5
                                                                                         10 5
  10 6
                                                                                         10 6
  10 7
                                                                                         10 7
  10 8
                                                                                         10 8
  10 9
                                                      r, rx, rv = 5, 5, 5                                                           r, rx, rv = 5, 5, 5
                                                      r, rx, rv = 10, 10, 10             10 9                                       r, rx, rv = 10, 10, 10
                                                      r, rx, rv = 15, 15, 15                                                        r, rx, rv = 15, 15, 15
  10 10                                               r, rx, rv = 5, 15, 15                                                         r, rx, rv = 5, 15, 15
          0    10         20                  30   40                          50                0   10   20                   30   40                       50


     Figure 4.3. Numerical simulations of the four-dimensional non-aligned linear Landau damping with the hierarchical
low-rank/FFT algorithm and various ranks are shown (note that the error in mass and energy is almost identical for all three
configurations). The Lie–Trotter splitting algorithm with a time step size τ = 0.00625 is employed. In the x-direction 64 grid
points are used, while in the v-direction 256 grid points are used. The L2 norm is only computed for every 100th time step.



low-rank algorithm proposed in section 3 are shown in Figure 4.2. We observe that the simulation with
rank (r, rx , rv ) = (5, 5, 5) is already able to correctly predict the decay rate. Considering the simulation
with (r, rx , rv ) = 10 shows a reduction in the electric energy to 10−8 which is approximately two orders of
magnitude better compared to the configuration with rank (r, rx , rv ) = (5, 5, 5). In all configurations mass,
energy, and the L2 norm are conserved up to an error less than 10−6 .
    To conclude the discussion on Landau damping, we consider a setting in which the perturbation is not
aligned to the coordinate axis. More specifically, we consider Ω = (0, 5π)2 × (−6, 6)2 and impose the initial
value

                                                        1 −(v2 +w2 )/2
                                  f0 (x, y, v, w) =       e            (1 + α cos(k1 x) cos(k2 y)),
                                                       2π

where we have chosen α = 10−2 and k1 = k2 = 0.4. As before, periodic boundary conditions are chosen
for all directions. The numerical results obtained using the hierarchical low-rank algorithm proposed in
section 3 are shown in Figure 4.3. We observe that the simulation with rank (r, rx , rv ) = (10, 10, 10) and
(r, rx , rv ) = (15, 15, 15) show a reduction of the electric energy to 5 · 10−6 and 5 · 10−7 , respectively. We also
note that r can be chosen significantly smaller than rx and rv , while still obtaining good results. For all
configurations the error in mass, energy, and L2 norm is below 10−5 .

    4.2. Two-stream instability. Our second numerical example is the so-called two-stream instability.
Here we have two beams propagating in opposite directions. This setup is an unstable equilibrium and
small perturbations in the initial particle-density function eventually force the electric energy to increase
exponentially. This is called the linear regime. At some later time saturation sets in (the nonlinear regime).
This phase is characterized by nearly constant electric energy and significant filamentation of the phase
space.
    First we consider the two-dimensional case. We thus set Ω = (0, 10π) × (−9, 9) and impose the initial
                                                                                    21
                                electric energy                                                            error mass
   101        r=5                                                       10 1        r=5
              r=10                                                                  r=10
              r=20                                                      10 3        r=20
  10 1        full grid                                                             full grid
                                                                        10 5
  10 3
                                                                        10 7
  10 5                                                                  10 9

  10 7                                                                  10 11

                                                                        10 13
  10 9
                                                                        10 15

          0               20   40                  60   80   100                0               20   40                   60   80           100

   100
                                    error energy                                                          error l2 norm
              r=5
              r=10
  10 2        r=20                                                      10 13
              full grid
  10 4

  10 6                                                                  10 14

  10 8

  10 10                                                                 10 15
                                                                                                                                    r=5
                                                                                                                                    r=10
  10 12                                                                                                                             r=20
                                                                                                                                    full grid
          0               20   40                  60   80   100                0               20   40                   60   80           100


     Figure 4.4. Numerical simulations of the two-dimensional two-stream instability with the low-rank/FFT algorithm and
various ranks are shown. The Strang splitting algorithm with a time step size τ = 0.025 is employed. In both the x and
v-directions 128 grid points are used. As comparison a direct Eulerian simulation with a splitting/discontinuous Galerkin
semi-Lagrangian scheme is also shown.


condition
                                             1  −(v−v0 )2 /2            2
                                                                            
                                f0 (x, v) = √   e             + e−(v+v0 ) /2 (1 + α cos(kx)),
                                           2 2π
where α = 10−3 , k = 15 , and v0 = 2.4. As before, periodic boundary conditions are used. The corresponding
numerical simulations obtained using the low-rank/FFT algorithm proposed in Section 2.1 are shown in
Figure 4.4. In the linear regime excellent agreement between the direct Eulerian simulation and the solution
with rank r = 5 is observed. As we enter the nonlinear regime all the solutions become somewhat distinct.
However, due to the chaotic nature of this regime this is not surprising. The figure of merit we are looking at
in the nonlinear regime is if the numerical scheme is able to keep the electric energy approximately constant.
All configurations starting from rank r = 10 do this very well.
     To further evaluate the quality of the numerical solution, let us consider the physical invariants. By
looking at Figure 4.4, it becomes clear that from this standpoint the two-stream instability is a significantly
more challenging problem than the linear Landau damping considered in the previous section. However, it
should be noted that most of the error in mass and energy is accrued during the exponential growth of the
electric energy but remains essentially unchanged in the nonlinear phase. In particular, there is no observable
long-term drift in the error of any of the invariants. With respect to energy, the low-rank approximation
with r = 10 is worse by approximately two orders of magnitude compared to the direct Eulerian simulation
(which has been conducted using a FFT based implementation). The L2 norm is conserved up to machine
precision.
     Second, we turn our attention to the four-dimensional case. We set Ω = (0, 10π)2 × (−9, 9)2 and impose
the initial condition
                    1  −(v−v0 )2 /2            2
                                                           2              2
                                                                               
 f0 (x, y, v, w) =     e             + e−(v+v0 ) /2 e−(v−w0 ) /2 + e−(v+w0 ) /2 (1 + α1 cos(k1 x) + α2 cos(k2 y))
                   8π
with α1 = α2 = 10−3 , k1 = k2 = 15 , v0 = w0 = 2.4. As before, periodic boundary conditions are employed
in all directions. We note that this configuration corresponds to four propagating beams. The numerical
                                                                   22
                           electric energy                                                                         error mass
   103                                                                                       100


   101                                                                                      10 2


  10 1                                                                                      10 4


  10 3                                                                                      10 6


  10 5                                                                                      10 8
                                                        r, rx, rv = 5, 5, 5                                                            r, rx, rv = 5, 5, 5
                                                        r, rx, rv = 10, 10, 10                                                         r, rx, rv = 10, 10, 10
  10 7                                                  r, rx, rv = 10, 15, 15              10 10                                      r, rx, rv = 10, 15, 15
                                                        r, rx, rv = 15, 15, 15                                                         r, rx, rv = 15, 15, 15
          0    20        40                  60        80                        100                0   20   40                   60   80                       100

                              error energy                                                                        error l2 norm
   100                                                                                       100

  10 2                                                                                      10 2


  10 4                                                                                      10 4

  10 6                                                                                      10 6

  10 8                                                                                      10 8
                                                        r, rx, rv = 5, 5, 5                                                            r, rx, rv = 5, 5, 5
                                                        r, rx, rv = 10, 10, 10                                                         r, rx, rv = 10, 10, 10
  10 10                                                 r, rx, rv = 10, 15, 15              10 10                                      r, rx, rv = 10, 15, 15
                                                        r, rx, rv = 15, 15, 15                                                         r, rx, rv = 15, 15, 15
          0    20        40                  60        80                        100                0   20   40                   60   80                       100


     Figure 4.5. Numerical simulations of the four-dimensional two-stream instability with the hierarchical low-rank/FFT
algorithm and various ranks are shown. The Lie–Trotter projector-splitting algorithm with a time step size τ = 0.00625 is
employed. In both the x- and v-directions 128 grid points are used. The L2 norm is only computed for every 100th time step.


results obtained using the hierarchical low-rank algorithm proposed in section 3 are shown in Figure 4.5.
The obtained results are similar to the two-dimensional case. In particular, in the linear regime we observe
excellent agreement even for (r, rx , rv ) = (5, 5, 5). The errors in mass, energy, and L2 norm are approximately
one order of magnitude better for the configuration with (r, rx , rv ) = (10, 10, 10) compared to (r, rx , rv ) =
(5, 5, 5).
     4.3. Plasma echo. There are problems that need to resolve Landau damping for relatively long times.
It is well known that due to the recurrence effect the number of grid points nv in each coordinate direction
of v has to scale as nv ∝ T , where T is the final time of the simulation (although this can be somewhat
alleviated by using filamentation filtration techniques; see, for example, [30, 15]). Due to the high number
of grid points required to conduct such simulation the proposed algorithm can be extremely efficient in this
context. We will now consider such an example, the plasma echo phenomenon (see, for example, [21, 27, 15]).
     We consider the domain (0, 100) × (−8, 8) and impose the initial condition

                                                                      1 −v2 /2
                                                  f0 (x, v) =           e      (1 + α cos(k1 x)),
                                                                     2π
where α = 10−3 and k1 = 12π/100. As before, periodic boundary conditions are used. The initial pertur-
bation in the electric field is damped away by Landau damping. Then at time t2 = 200 we add another
perturbation of the form
                                                                 α −v2 /2
                                                                    e     cos(k2 x),
                                                                 2π
where k2 = 24π/100. The corresponding perturbation in the electric field is, again, damped away. However,
the particle-density function retains all the information regarding the two perturbations. As a consequence,
at later times an echo (a peak in the amplitude of the electric field) occurs. The time of the echo depends
on the wave numbers of the two perturbations. In the present case we expect a primary echo at t = 400 and
a secondary echo at t = 800. This setup has been considered in [27] and [15].
                                                                                       23
                            electric energy                                                   electric energy
  10 5                                                      r=5           10 5                                                r=10

  10 7                                                                    10 7

  10 9                                                                    10 9

  10 11                                                                   10 11

  10 13                                                                   10 13

  10 15                                                                   10 15

  10 17                                                                   10 17

  10 19                                                                   10 19
          0    200        400                  600   800      1000                0   200   400                   600   800      1000

                            electric energy                                                        error mass
  10 5                                                     r=15           10 12

  10 7
                                                                          10 13
  10 9

  10 11
                                                                          10 14
  10 13

  10 15                                                                   10 15
                                                                                                                              r=5
  10 17                                                                                                                       r=10
                                                                                                                              r=15
  10 19                                                                   10 16
          0    200        400                  600   800      1000                0   200   400                   600   800      1000

                                error energy                                                      error l2 norm
                                                           r=5
  10 10                                                    r=10           10 12
                                                           r=15

  10 11
                                                                          10 13
  10 12

                                                                          10 14
  10 13

  10 14                                                                   10 15                                               r=5
                                                                                                                              r=10
  10 15                                                                                                                       r=15
          0    200        400                  600   800      1000                0   200   400                   600   800      1000


     Figure 4.6. Numerical simulations of the two-dimensional plasma echo with the low-rank/FFT algorithm and various
ranks are shown. The Strang projector-splitting algorithm with a time step size τ = 0.025 is employed. In the x- and v-direction
512 and 4096 grid points are used, respectively. Note that due to the second perturbation, we restart the computation of the
errors in mass, energy, and L2 norm at t = 200.



    The corresponding numerical simulations are shown in Figure 4.6. Even for r = 5 both the primary and
the secondary echo are clearly resolved. This holds true even though the electric energy is only resolved up
to an amplitude of approximately 10−11 and the magnitude of the secondary echo is only slightly above that
threshold. Increasing the rank (to r = 10) then allows us to resolve the growth and decay of the electric
energy associated with the secondary echo as well. Since this problem requires only a small rank but a large
number of grid points (4096 grid points are used in the velocity direction and 512 grid points are used in
the space direction), the computational effort required is reduced by a significant margin. Let us also note
that, for all configurations considered here, the conservation of mass, energy, and L2 norm is excellent (below
10−10 ).
    Overall, the results presented here for Landau damping, the two-stream instability, and the plasma echo,
show that significant reduction in computational effort can be obtained compared with performing a direct
simulation. In fact, all simulations have been performed on a somewhat outdated workstation and no effort
has been made to parallelize the code.




                                                                     24
                                                      REFERENCES


 [1] A. Arnold and T. Jahnke. On the approximation of high-dimensional differential equations in the hierarchical Tucker
         format. BIT Numerical Mathematics, 54(2):305–341, 2014.
 [2] J. Bigot, V. Grandgirard, G. Latu, C. Passeron, F. Rozar, and O. Thomine. Scaling GYSELA code beyond 32K-cores on
         Blue Gene/Q. In ESAIM: Proceedings, volume 43, pages 117–135, 2013.
 [3] C. Cheng and G. Knorr. The integration of the Vlasov equation in configuration space. J. Comput. Phys., 22(3):330–351,
         1976.
 [4] D. Conte and C. Lubich. An error analysis of the multi-configuration time-dependent Hartree method of quantum
         dynamics. ESAIM Math. Model. Numer. Anal., 44(4):759–780, 2010.
 [5] N. Crouseilles, L. Einkemmer, and E. Faou. Hamiltonian splitting for the Vlasov–Maxwell equations. J. Comput. Phys.,
         283:224–240, 2015.
 [6] N. Crouseilles, L. Einkemmer, and E. Faou. An asymptotic preserving scheme for the relativistic Vlasov–Maxwell equations
         in the classical limit. Comput. Phys. Commun., 209:13–26, 2016.
 [7] N. Crouseilles, L. Einkemmer, and M. Prugger. An exponential integrator for the drift-kinetic model. arXiv:1705.09923,
         2017.
 [8] N. Crouseilles, G. Latu, and E. Sonnendrücker. A parallel Vlasov solver based on local cubic spline interpolation on
         patches. J. Comput. Phys., 228(5):1429–1446, 2009.
 [9] N. Crouseilles, M. Mehrenberger, and F. Vecil. Discontinuous Galerkin semi-Lagrangian method for Vlasov-Poisson. In
         ESAIM: Proceedings, volume 32, pages 211–230, 2011.
[10] E. Deriaz and S. Peirani. Six-dimensional adaptive simulation of the Vlasov equations using a hierarchical basis. hal-
         01419750, 2016.
[11] L. Einkemmer. A mixed precision semi-Lagrangian algorithm and its performance on accelerators. In High Performance
         Computing & Simulation (HPCS), 2016 International Conference on, pages 74–80, 2016.
[12] L. Einkemmer. High performance computing aspects of a dimension independent semi-Lagrangian discontinuous Galerkin
         code. Comput. Phys. Commun., 202:326–336, 2016.
[13] L. Einkemmer. A study on conserving invariants of the Vlasov equation in semi-Lagrangian computer simulations. J.
         Plasma Phys., 83(2), 2017.
[14] L. Einkemmer. A comparison of semi-Lagrangian discontinuous Galerkin and spline based Vlasov solvers in four dimen-
         sions. arXiv preprint, arXiv:1803.02143, 2018.
[15] L. Einkemmer and A. Ostermann. A strategy to suppress recurrence in grid-based Vlasov solvers. Eur. Phys. J. D,
         68(7):197, 2014.
[16] L. Einkemmer and A. Ostermann. An almost symmetric Strang splitting scheme for nonlinear evolution equations.
         Comput. Math. Appl., 67(12):2144–2157, 2014.
[17] L. Einkemmer and A. Ostermann. An almost symmetric Strang splitting scheme for the construction of high order
         composition methods. Comput. Appl. Math., 271:307–318, 2014.
[18] E. Fijalkow. A numerical solution to the Vlasov equation. Comput. Phys. Commun., 116(2-3):319–328, 1999.
[19] F. Filbet and E. Sonnendrücker. Comparison of Eulerian Vlasov solvers. Comput. Phys. Commun., 150(3):247–266, 2003.
[20] F. Filbet, E. Sonnendrücker, and P. Bertrand. Conservative numerical schemes for the Vlasov equation. J. Comput. Phys.,
         172(1):166–187, 2001.
[21] R.W. Gould, T.M. O’Neil, and J.H. Malmberg. Plasma wave echo. Phys. Rev. Lett., 19(5):219–222, 1967.
[22] V. Grandgirard, J. Abiteboul, J. Bigot, T. Cartier-Michaud, N. Crouseilles, G. Dif-Pradalier, Ch. Ehrlacher, D. Esteve,
         X. Garbet, Ph. Ghendrih, G. Latu, M. Mehrenberger, C. Norscini, C. Passeron, F. Rozar, Y. Sarazin, E. Sonnen-
         drÃŒcker, A. Strugarek, and D. Zarzoso. A 5D gyrokinetic full-f global semi-Lagrangian code for flux-driven ion
         turbulence simulations. Comput. Phys. Commun., 207:35–68, 2016.
[23] V. Grandgirard, M. Brunetti, P. Bertrand, N. Besse, X. Garbet, P. Ghendrih, G. Manfredi, Y. Sarazin, O. Sauter,
         E. Sonnendrücker, J. Vaclavik, and L. Villard. A drift-kinetic Semi-Lagrangian 4D code for ion turbulence simulation.
         J. Comput. Phys., 217(2):395–423, 2006.
[24] We. Guo and Y. Cheng. A sparse grid discontinuous Galerkin method for high-dimensional transport equations and its
         application to kinetic simulation. SIAM J. Sci. Comput., 38(6):3381–3409, 2016.
[25] J. Haegeman, C. Lubich, I. Oseledets, B. Vandereycken, and F. Verstraete. Unifying time evolution and optimization with
         matrix product states. Physical Review B, 94(16):165116, 2016.
[26] M. Hochbruck and A. Ostermann. Exponential integrators. Acta Numer., 19:209–286, 2010.
[27] Y.W. Hou, Z.W. Ma, and M.Y. Yu. The plasma wave echo revisited. Phys. Plasmas, 18(1):012108, 2011.
[28] T. Jahnke and W. Huisinga. A dynamical low-rank approach to the chemical master equation. Bulletin of mathematical
         biology, 70(8):2283–2302, 2008.
[29] E. Kieri, C. Lubich, and H. Walach. Discretized dynamical low-rank approximation in the presence of small singular
         values. SIAM J. Numer. Anal., 54(2):1020–1038, 2016.
[30] A.J. Klimas and W.M. Farrell. A splitting algorithm for Vlasov simulation with filamentation filtration. J. Comput.
         Phys., 110(1):150–163, 1994.
[31] O. Koch and C. Lubich. Dynamical low-rank approximation. SIAM J. Matrix Anal. Appl., 29(2):434–454, 2007.
[32] O. Koch and C. Lubich. Dynamical tensor approximation. SIAM J. Matrix Anal. Appl., 31(5):2360–2375, 2010.
[33] K. Kormann. A semi-Lagrangian Vlasov solver in tensor train format. SIAM J. Sci. Comput., 37(4):613–632, 2015.
[34] K. Kormann and E. Sonnendrücker. Sparse grids for the Vlasov–Poisson equation. Sparse Grids Appl., pages 163–190,
         2014.
[35] G. Latu, N. Crouseilles, V. Grandgirard, and E. Sonnendrücker. Gyrokinetic semi-lagrangian parallel simulation using a
                                                             25
          hybrid OpenMP/MPI programming. In 14th European PVM/MPI Userś Group Meeting, pages 356–364, 2007.
[36] C. Lubich. From quantum to classical molecular dynamics: reduced models and numerical analysis. European Mathe-
          matical Society, 2008.
[37] C. Lubich. Time integration in the multiconfiguration time-dependent Hartree method of molecular quantum dynamics.
          Applied Mathematics Research eXpress, 2015(2):311–328, 2015.
[38] C. Lubich, I. V. Oseledets, and B. Vandereycken. Time integration of tensor trains. SIAM J. Numer. Anal., 53(2):917–941,
          2015.
[39] C. Lubich and I.V. Oseledets. A projector-splitting integrator for dynamical low-rank approximation. BIT Numer. Math.,
          54(1):171–188, 2014.
[40] C. Lubich, T. Rohwedder, R. Schneider, and B. Vandereycken. Dynamical approximation by hierarchical Tucker and
          tensor-train tensors. SIAM J. Matrix Anal. Appl., 34(2):470–494, 2013.
[41] C. Lubich, B. Vandereycken, and H. Walach. Time integration of rank-constrained Tucker tensors. Preprint,
          arXiv:1709.02594, 2017.
[42] M. Mehrenberger, C. Steiner, L. Marradi, N. Crouseilles, E. Sonnendrucker, and B. Afeyan. Vlasov on GPU (VOG
          project). arXiv:1301.5892, 2013.
[43] H. Mena, A. Ostermann, L. Pfurtscheller, and C. Piazzola. Numerical low-rank approximation of matrix differential
          equations. arXiv:1705.10175, 2017.
[44] H.-D. Meyer, F. Gatti, and G. A. Worth. Multidimensional quantum dynamics. John Wiley & Sons, 2009.
[45] H.-D. Meyer, U. Manthe, and L. S. Cederbaum. The multi-configurational time-dependent Hartree approach. Chem.
          Phys. Letters, 165(1):73–78, 1990.
[46] P. J. Morrison. Structure and structure-preserving algorithms for plasma physics. Cit. Phys. Plasmas, 24(055502), 2017.
[47] E. Musharbash and F. Nobile. Dual dynamically orthogonal approximation of incompressible navier stokes equations with
          random boundary conditions. J. Comp. Phys., 354:135–162, 2018.
[48] A. Nonnenmacher and C. Lubich. Dynamical low-rank approximation: applications and numerical experiments. Mathe-
          matics and Computers in Simulation, 79(4):1346–1357, 2008.
[49] J.M. Qiu and C.W. Shu. Positivity preserving semi-Lagrangian discontinuous Galerkin formulation: theoretical analysis
          and application to the Vlasov–Poisson system. J. Comput. Phys., 230(23):8386–8409, 2011.
[50] J.A. Rossmanith and D.C. Seal. A positivity-preserving high-order semi-Lagrangian discontinuous Galerkin scheme for
          the Vlasov–Poisson equations. J. Comput. Phys., 230(16):6203–6232, 2011.
[51] F. Rozar, G. Latu, and J. Roman. Achieving memory scalability in the GYSELA code to fit exascale constraints. In
          Parallel Processing and Applied Mathematics, pages 185–195. 2013.
[52] N. J. Sircombe and T. D. Arber. VALIS: A split-conservative scheme for the relativistic 2D Vlasov–Maxwell system. J.
          Comput. Phys., 228(13):4773–4788, 2009.
[53] E. Sonnendrücker, J. Roche, P. Bertrand, and A. Ghizzo. The semi-Lagrangian method for the numerical resolution of
          the Vlasov equation. J. Comput. Phys., 149(2):201–220, 1999.
[54] J. P. Verboncoeur. Particle simulation of plasmas: review and advances. Plasma Physics and Controlled Fusion,
          47(5A):A231, 2005.




                                                             26
