                                                                       D EEP R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING
                                                                       FOR A DAPTIVE M ESH R EFINEMENT

                                                                                                 A P REPRINT


                                                                   Corbin Foucart∗,1,2 , Aaron Charous 1,2 , Pierre F.J. Lermusiaux†,1
                                                       1
                                                           Department of Mechanical Engineering, 2 Center for Computational Science and Engineering




arXiv:2209.12351v1 [cs.CE] 25 Sep 2022
                                                                                    Massachusetts Institute of Technology
                                                                                          Cambridge, MA 02139


                                                                                              September 27, 2022

                                                                                                 A BSTRACT
                                                     Finite element discretizations of problems in computational physics often rely on adaptive mesh
                                                     refinement (AMR) to preferentially resolve regions containing important features during simulation.
                                                     However, these spatial refinement strategies are often heuristic and rely on domain-specific knowledge
                                                     or trial-and-error. We treat the process of adaptive mesh refinement as a local, sequential decision-
                                                     making problem under incomplete information, formulating AMR as a partially observable Markov
                                                     decision process. Using a deep reinforcement learning approach, we train policy networks for AMR
                                                     strategy directly from numerical simulation. The training process does not require an exact solution
                                                     or a high-fidelity ground truth to the partial differential equation at hand, nor does it require a pre-
                                                     computed training dataset. The local nature of our reinforcement learning formulation allows the
                                                     policy network to be trained inexpensively on much smaller problems than those on which they are
                                                     deployed. The methodology is not specific to any particular partial differential equation, problem
                                                     dimension, or numerical discretization, and can flexibly incorporate diverse problem physics. To that
                                                     end, we apply the approach to a diverse set of partial differential equations, using a variety of high-
                                                     order discontinuous Galerkin and hybridizable discontinuous Galerkin finite element discretizations.
                                                     We show that the resultant deep reinforcement learning policies are competitive with common AMR
                                                     heuristics, generalize well across problem classes, and strike a favorable balance between accuracy
                                                     and cost such that they often lead to a higher accuracy per problem degree of freedom.

                                         Keywords Reinforcement learning, adaptive mesh refinement, finite element methods, computational fluid dynamics.

                                         1       Introduction
                                         In recent decades, the finite element community has developed principled, efficient techniques for solving partial
                                         differential equations (PDEs). Not only are these techniques extremely general methods that may be applied to almost
                                         any PDE, they also provide guarantees such as stability, consistency, and convergence [13, 31]. On the other hand, the
                                         machine learning community has developed a broad set of methods to learn latent patterns from large datasets in the
                                         absence of a model [9, 36, 44]. However, for problems in computational physics, it is often the case that the PDE is
                                         an excellent model of the underlying physical phenomena, often down to the molecular level, where the continuum
                                         assumption begins to lose validity. Attempts to use machine learning to learn solutions to PDEs directly have shown
                                         promise for relatively trivial problems, but are as of yet subject to several failure modes in terms of generalization to
                                         even moderately more complicated problems [40]. Rather than ignoring the extensive body of work in either field, we
                                         propose combining techniques from numerical mathematics and machine learning in order to preserve mathematically
                                         hard-earned guarantees while improving accuracy and efficiency by applying machine learning to the peripheral aspects
                                         of numerical methods which lack a model and rely purely on heuristics. Adaptive mesh refinement is one such aspect.
                                             ∗
                                                 foucartc@mit.edu
                                             †
                                                 Corresponding author: pierrel@mit.edu
                             Deep Reinforcement Learning for Adaptive Mesh Refinement                          A P REPRINT



Uniform meshes are often computationally inefficient for finite element simulations in that the mesh density required
to resolve complex physical features such as steep gradients or small-scale processes is used everywhere over the
computational domain, even in regions where the numerical solution is smooth and much coarser resolution could be
used. In many problems, such features are dynamic: eddies, meandering jets, or nonlinearly evolving cracks constitute
some examples. To optimize efficiency, adaptive mesh refinement (AMR) techniques are a class of methods that
dynamically modify the computational mesh during simulation in an attempt to increase resolution specifically where it
is needed [56].
Most AMR techniques follow an iterative procedure of numerically solving the PDE, estimating the error on
each element, marking a subset of the mesh elements for refinement or de-refinement (coarsening), and ex-
ecuting the alterations to the mesh [12, 17]; this well-established paradigm is commonly referred to as the
SOLVE→ESTIMATE→MARK→REFINE loop, terminology we will use in the present work. Following each
numerical solve, the ESTIMATE process involves estimating the discretization error on each cell in the mesh. In this
paper, we draw the distinction between an error estimator, which provides objective measures of error in a specific norm,
and an error indicator, which offers an empirical indication as to the local magnitude of numerical error but provides
no theoretical guarantees. The MARK process selects cells for coarsening and refinement based on the estimates of the
error. Two common approaches are bulk refinement and fixed-number refinement [7, 8, 12, 18, 32, 33, 52]. The former
marks all the cells responsible for a specified percentage of the (estimated) total error for refinement and similarly for
coarsening. The latter refines and coarsens a fixed percentage of the total number of cells.
While AMR methodologies have allowed computational scientists to solve problems which are completely intractable on
a uniform mesh [38], the application of AMR strategies remains largely heuristic, and best practices are not universally
agreed upon [56]. The process of estimating the error on each cell is often complex, dependent on both the PDE and the
numerical method used to solve it, and constitutes an active subject of research [1, 6, 19]. In general, for nonlinear
partial differential equations, it is often difficult, and in some cases, impossible to provide an upper bound on the error.
Even in the situations where rigorous error estimation is possible, the bounds on the error may not be tight, or may apply
to a limited subset of problems, rendering the estimator ineffectual. As a consequence, in practice, these estimators tend
to be optimistically applied as ad hoc error indicators. A relevant example is the well-known Kelly error “estimator”
[37], which is derived from analysis specifically for the Poisson equation, but is widely employed in AMR strategies for
the spatial discretizations of many other PDEs [2, 11, 35, 66, 70] despite its lack of theoretical applicability. Equally
important, but often overlooked in the literature, the MARK process is also fraught with challenges. In attempting to
refine only the cells which constitute a certain percentage of the error, bulk refinement strategies can be expensive in
cases with very few cells at singularities, miss important features of the solution, and present difficulties controlling the
number of cells in the mesh [18, 52]. With fixed-number refinement, the number of cells in the mesh can be readily
controlled, but the approach can wastefully refine too many cells [18]. Furthermore, the parameters in either of these
methods (i.e., the algorithmic realization of a refinement strategy with regard to the percentages of the estimated error
to refine and coarsen in the case of bulk refinement or exactly how many cells to refine and coarsen in the case of fixed
number refinement) are choices typically made a priori before a numerical simulation begins. In doing so, the balance
between coarsening and refinement is implicitly assumed to be static in time, rather than dynamically driven by the
behavior of the underlying solution and available computational resources.
As a result, even after decades of research, in practice, AMR strategies remain largely unprincipled and often require
domain-specific knowledge, trial and error, or manual intervention. Selecting and combining an efficient set of AMR
heuristics for a new problem is a challenging endeavor and open research problem in general [18]—there exists a clear
need for an automated, flexible, and principled approach to AMR, motivating the present research.
We propose the treatment of AMR as a partially observable Markov decision process (POMDP) that can be interpreted
as a local Markov decision process (MDP) on each element and apply a deep reinforcement learning (RL) approach
[4] in which we train an agent to increase or decrease mesh resolution, balancing improved accuracy against the
computational cost associated with each mesh modification decision. Deep reinforcement learning replaces the expected
reward function from the well-known classical Q-learning algorithm with a neural network as a function approximator
[62], allowing for the discovery of arbitrarily sophisticated decision-making policies based on unstructured input data
[34, 60] and obviating the need to manually engineer aspects of the strategy. In doing so, we replace the ESTIMATE
and MARK processes in AMR with a trained RL policy learned from numerical simulation.
In the present work, we focus primarily on high-order discontinuous Galerkin finite element methods (DG-FEM), in
part due to their incredible success in modeling a wide range of phenomena in computational physics (see [31, 43]
and references therein) and due to their discontinuous representation of the numerical solution. It is this discontinuous
representation that reliably links the smoothness of the local solution as measured by the interface jumps to local error
[16] in a way that can be well-leveraged by a decision-making agent, as we develop in §2.2.2. The same property gives
rise to the simple and effective non-conformity error estimator and its variants examined in the DG-FEM literature



                                                             2
                            Deep Reinforcement Learning for Adaptive Mesh Refinement                         A P REPRINT



[26, 19, 41, 42, 53]. As demonstrated in what follows, the DG-FEM discretization plays an important role in the
construction of the observation spaces for the reinforcement learning problem. However, in principle, our methodology
could be applied with minor modifications to classical continuous Galerkin finite element methods or even other
numerical methods such as finite difference or finite volume methods.

1.1   Related work and novel contributions

Optimal mesh refinement strategies have been shown to be theoretically learnable in a recurrent neural network setting
[10]. The application of deep RL specifically to problems in computational physics is in its infancy, and recent work at
the intersection between the disciplines can be found in [20, 67, 68]. A deep RL approach for the related problem of
mesh generation is explored in [55]. The work in [69] constitutes the first attempt to formulate AMR as an RL problem
and demonstrates the feasibility of the approach. The present work was developed concurrently and independently,
and we formulate the deep RL problem differently. To avoid growing and shrinking action and observation spaces, our
decision-making problem is inherently local rather than defined over the entire mesh; to that end, our observation space
includes measures of local non-conformity of the solution. We elect not to impose a max refinement depth or provide
a hard limit on the refinement budget in the action space; rather, we impose these restrictions implicitly through our
reward function. Accordingly, we do not aim to maximize total error reduction; our reward function seeks to strike a
tunable balance between the accuracy of the numerical solution and available computational resources.
In this work, we present novel theory and schemes that use a POMDP representation to formulate AMR as a deep RL
problem under incomplete information and obtain a trained RL policy that can be thought of as a custom error indicator
discovered through trial and error. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first work that includes both refinement and
de-refinement actions as part of the resultant policy. We provide a very general framework for choosing an observation
space that can incorporate physically relevant features of the PDE to be solved. The methodology is non-reliant on an
exact solution or ground truth during model training or deployment. The agent learns a cost-effective refinement and
coarsening strategy that balances improved solution accuracy with computational cost, as opposed to a hard threshold.
DG-FEM methods have been shown to be competitive in the under-resolved regimes of fluid flow simulation, both in
the sense of stability and robustness of the schemes [21], and in their ability to transport high-frequency features over
long time-integration horizons without altering the shape of the features or losing amplitude (dispersion and dissipation)
[64, 22]. Therefore, practically, the ability of DG-FEM schemes to capture and preserve physical features is more an
important criterion of merit than the norm-measured errors often presented in academic convergence studies, (see [43],
pp.35-48). This is crucial, as it suggests that any performant AMR technique should be measured against its ability to
resolve dynamical features while making efficient use of problem degrees of freedom. This motivates the specific form
of our reward function, as well as informs our primary objective of this work; to obtain an AMR policy that accurately
resolves features of the numerical solution and efficiently uses computational resources.
The paper is organized as follows. In §2, we introduce our RL formulation of the adaptive mesh refinement problem.
The partially observable Markov decision process is described in §2.2, with the action and observation spaces detailed
in §2.2.1-§2.2.2. The design and implementation of a new reward function that allows for model training without the
need for exact or ground-truth solutions to the underlying problem are provided in §2.3. Procedures for training and
deployment are given in §2.4, and a brief discussion of the deep learning policy architectures employed therein is
specified in §2.5. The discontinuous Galerkin spatial discretizations for the numerical forward models are provided in
§3 for different PDEs. In §4, we demonstrate the efficacy of the methodology on a set of numerical test cases spanning
a variety of PDEs and numerical methods. We show that the resultant RL policies can outperform widely-used AMR
heuristics in terms of accuracy per degree of freedom and that the policy corresponding to a single trained model
generalizes well to different boundary conditions, forcing functions, and problem sizes. We offer concluding remarks in
§5.


2     Deep reinforcement learning framework

Deep reinforcement learning combines reinforcement learning with deep learning using a neural network to represent
the value function, policy, or model considered in a classical RL setting [47]. Similar to other deep learning approaches,
the network is typically trained by optimization of a loss function over many episodes in which a strategy that maximizes
the expected reward (2.1) is determined through trial and error. This approach is attractive, as it does not require
domain-specific knowledge, nor does it require a large training data set; training data is generated experientially by
“self-play” as the agent interacts with its environment.
Formulating an RL approach (§2.1) to a problem involves describing the underlying decision process and representation
of the agent and the state (§2.2). We must specify a reward function (§2.3) which encodes desirable behaviors of the


                                                            3
                                Deep Reinforcement Learning for Adaptive Mesh Refinement                           A P REPRINT



resultant learned policy. Lastly, we must specify the neural network architectures which are to represent the different
parts of the RL problem (§2.5). The subsections that follow present our novel formulation of adaptive mesh refinement
as a deep RL problem.

2.1   Notation

Reinforcement learning is characterized by a decision-making agent that interacts with an environment described by a
state S. We consider the discrete-time case: at time step t ∈ {0, 1, 2, . . .}, the observable state of the environment is St
and the action selected by the agent is At , the latter of which gives rise to the reward Rt+1 and modified state St+1 .
A partially observable Markov decision process (POMDP) is a formalism for describing a sequential decision-making
process under incomplete information [5]. A POMDP is characterized by (S, A, R, T, O, O, γ), where the sets S, A,
and R are the sets of possible states, actions, and rewards, respectively. The state transition function T : S × A × S →
[0, 1] encodes the distribution of transition probabilities from a state St = s to St+1 = s0 given the action a; that is,
T (s, a, s0 ) returns the probability of transitioning to state St+1 = s0 under the action At = a executed in state St = s.
The set O is the set of possible observations, and the probability distribution O(o|s, a) describes the probabilities over
the set of possible new observations Ot+1 = o ∈ O upon taking action At = a in state St = s. The scalar γ ∈ [0, 1] is
a time discount factor—a lower discount factor motivates the agent to favor taking actions early. A POMDP differs
from a standard Markov decision process (MDP) in that the agent does not have access to the complete state St , but
rather, indirect observations of it.
The goal of RL is to find a stochastic policy function π : O → A that maps the observation space, that we take as a
subset of the entire space O ⊆ S, to the set of actions that maximizes the expected reward
                                                  "∞                               #
                                                    X
                                                          k
                                 Qt (s, a) = Eπ         γ Rt+k+1 | St = s, At = a
                                                         k=0

over an infinite time horizon [59].

2.2   Elemental refinement as a local Markov decision process

As per the approach described in [3, 7] and references therein, the computational mesh is composed of linear, quadrilat-
eral, or hexahedral elements, and represented by a tree data structure. Upon refinement of an element, 2d child elements
are generated by bisection and marked as active, while the parent element is marked as inactive. The active cells of the
computational mesh at any given time are the leaves of the tree. This process is schematically illustrated in Figure 1. In
this paper, we refer to elements (active or inactive) which share the same parent element as “sibling” elements.

                                     (a)                         (b)




Figure 1: (a) Adaptively refined elements in a computational mesh Th generated from a single element. (b) Underlying data
structure representation as a tree, with inactive parent elements and active elements as the leaves of the tree.


The state St is described by the current computational mesh Th , its numerical solution, uh , and any data known to the
PDE (boundary conditions, forcing functions, etc.), which we refer to as D. Formally, the POMDP is well-defined, as
we can define the global state space as the set of all possible mesh configurations and numerical solutions. However,
the consideration of the global state and action spaces is computationally intractable, as the agent would encounter a
combinatorially growing space of actions to explore.
In light of this fact, we consider a local description of the state as the observation space in the POMDP in order to train
the agent. During training, the agent observes a single cell locally, takes action on the current cell alone, and receives a
reward which is the effect of its local action on the entire computational domain. The agent is subsequently moved to
another cell in the mesh randomly, according to a distribution Bt (Ot , St+1 ) which encodes the POMDP belief in the
state of the environment and which cell should be visited next. In this work, for simplicity, we take the distribution


                                                                   4
                              Deep Reinforcement Learning for Adaptive Mesh Refinement                           A P REPRINT



to be uniform over all cells in the mesh. However, a Bayesian treatment of the belief state is possible within our RL
formulation.
Although it may seem counter-intuitive to train the agent on small subsets of the entire state space, formulating the
learning problem locally in this way has several advantages. Considering the entire state of the mesh as an MDP
leads to a growing and shrinking action space as the mesh changes, with a combinatorially growing number of action
possibilities; this can be addressed [69]—however, the complicated action space may present training and generalization
difficulties. Second, many problems in computational physics are governed by PDEs with strong spatial locality, which
is why the linear systems arising from the discretization of PDEs are typically sparse. Therefore it makes sense to view
the RL problem on a single element rather than on the entire mesh, as the numerical solution is typically more sensitive
to local phenomena. This is not always the case; e.g., in elliptic PDEs, it is well-known that errors are propagated
globally [61]; to address this, we specifically include elliptic PDE test cases in our numerical experiments in §4. Lastly,
the resultant trained neural network constituting the RL policy has the intuitive interpretation of a custom cell-wise error
indicator learned during training. With this interpretation, it can be seen that the same trained model can be deployed
repeatedly over the entire mesh, in parallel if desired.

2.2.1   Action space
The action space of the agent is the discrete set A = {coarsen, do nothing, refine}, with respect to the current
cell. The goal of the RL problem can be stated succinctly as: train the agent such that it refines in areas that are locally
under-resolved, coarsens in areas that are locally over-resolved, and takes no action otherwise. Furthermore, the agent
should take these actions flexibly and efficiently with respect to the available computational resources.
While it is always possible to refine, the mesh may be in a state such that it is not topologically possible to coarsen the
current cell. This is because the current cell could be at the coarsest possible level of the mesh, e.g., a computational
mesh comprised of a single cell, or because the siblings of the current element could have arbitrarily many children, and
coarsening is only possible when all the sibling cells are at the highest possible refinement level (i.e., leaves on the
tree). For example, in the mesh depicted in Figure 1, all of the elements marked as blue can be coarsened, whereas
those marked as gray can not. Our implementation is such that if coarsening is not possible, the agent defaults to doing
nothing. Under this set of actions, the transition function between states is technically deterministic. On the other hand,
conceptually, it is useful to think of the transition as probabilistic, i.e., an attempt to coarsen succeeds with a probability
that is a function of the present state of the mesh.

2.2.2   Observation space
The observation space O is the observable portion of the total state S. The observation space on an element K ∈ Th of
the computational mesh consists of:
                                                                                                         R
     A. The jumps in the numerical solution integrated over the boundary of the cell, denoted ΞK = ∂K Juh K d∂K,
         as well as ΞK 0 for the cell neighbors K 0
                                                                 P
      B. The average integrated jump across all mesh elements K ΞK /NK
      C. The current usage of available computational resources p
     D. Any physically relevant features of the numerical solution or data φ(uh , D) local to the cell, where φ(·) refers
         to a feature and D refers to available data

The rationale for the inclusion of item (A.) is that discontinuities present at the element interfaces measure the non-
conformity of the numerical solution. This is due to the assumption that, in the absence of a physical discontinuity, the
exact solution is continuous across element interfaces. This observation is borne out by straightforward analysis, which
shows a strong relationship between the residuals of the numerical solution uh over the element interior and the jumps
across the inter-element boundaries [16], leading to the development of so-called “non-conformity” error estimators
[53] specific to discontinuous Galerkin finite element methods.
Although formulating the observation space of the POMDP as a completely local problem is computationally attractive,
it is clear that in the absence of global information, the agent should always perform the refine action. Items (B.) and
(C.) both serve the purpose of communicating global information regarding the relative utility of local refinement to the
local decision process.
The inclusion of the average integrated jump over all mesh elements provides information about the relative estimate of
the error on the current cell as compared to other cells in the mesh. During training, this element of the observation
space allows the agent to decide when to forgo the opportunity to refine the current cell in order to spend computational
resources elsewhere in the mesh, where the numerical errors may be greater than those observed locally.


                                                              5
                             Deep Reinforcement Learning for Adaptive Mesh Refinement                         A P REPRINT



The scalar p ∈ [0, 1] indicates the current usage of available computational resources. In this work, we take p to be the
fraction of active mesh elements out of a user-specified maximum number of elements. However, p need not have this
representation: in the case of an HPC application, the value of p could be measured directly by monitoring CPU or
memory usage in real time. Alternatively, p could be defined with respect to a maximum allowable wall-clock time
per solution time step or could be computed from some other a priori allocation of computational resources such as
RAM or arithmetic throughput. Regardless of how the computational usage p is defined, its inclusion in the observation
space serves to indicate to the agent the availability of computational resources; the reward function §2.3 specifies the
cost-benefit relationship of making use of them.
Due to item (D.), this observation space is very flexible and general. This is by design, as it allows the user to include
physically or computationally relevant information which may help the agent learn a more effective strategy. As an
example, the advection problem as described in §3.2 may include the local convective velocity in the observation space,
as it determines the flow of information.
Remark. In this paper, we emphasize discontinuous Galerkin methods due to the simplicity and effectiveness of the
non-conformity of the local solution as a proxy for the local error. In the case of classical continuous Galerkin finite
element schemes, the jump of the solution along the element boundary is identically zero, due to the continuous nature
of the approximation spaces in which the numerical solution is sought [13]. However, item (A.) can be readily replaced
with other indicators of non-conformity in order to generalize the methodology to other finite element discretizations.
For example, the jump of the solution gradient along the element boundary can be applied as a simple surrogate in the
continuous Galerkin case—the core principle is to select a numerical quantity that vanishes as the numerical solution
approaches the exact solution of the PDE. However, more sophisticated indicators of non-conformity exist [6].

2.3   Designing the reward function

The reward function is an environment-provided reinforcement signal that determines the immediate reward or penalty
due to each decision on the part of the agent [62]. In that sense, the reward function is central to the ultimate behavior
of the agent after training and should encode all the information pertaining to what we wish our agent to accomplish.
For AMR, the reward function used to train the agent should strike a balance between improvements in accuracy and
incurring additional computational costs. With these conditions, our proposed reward function takes the general form of

                                                    [accuracy] − γc [cost]B(p).                                        (1)

The coefficient γc is a scaling factor expressing the relative importance of the accuracy of the solution versus increasing
computational cost in the RL agent’s policy; it can either be tuned as a hyperparameter or empirically computed for
different computational regimes. The function B(p) : [0, 1) → [0, ∞) acts as an asymptotic barrier discouraging the
agent from exceeding the limit of its computational resources. Two choices are shown in in Figure 2. The barrier
function can be modified to encourage the agent to use a certain percentage of resources, for example, to incentivize
aggressive refinement in the under-resolved case, which we refer√to as a barrier function “with hortation”. In this paper,
unless otherwise specified, we use the barrier function B(p) = p/(1 − p).
It remains to define a metric for improvement in solution and change in computational cost for each of the terms in
equation (1).

                                                       polynomial barrier functions
                                                5
                                                          barrier
                                                         barrier with hortation




                                         B(p)   0




                                                5
                                                 0.0                    0.5           1.0
                                                                         p
                                                                                                                  √
Figure 2: Example of polynomial barrier function B(p) = p/(1−p) and hortative barrier function B(p) = p/(1−p)−[1/ p−1].


                                                                    6
                              Deep Reinforcement Learning for Adaptive Mesh Refinement                                A P REPRINT



Accuracy. The optimality properties of the numerical solution arising from continuous and discontinuous Galerkin
finite element discretizations ensure that the error of the solution (measured in an appropriate norm) decreases or
remains the same upon any refinement of the computational mesh [13, 16, 31]. These properties are crucial, as they
guarantee that any change in the error of the numerical solution, e(uh ) = kuh − uexact kL2 (Ω) , that arise as a result
of refinement will be monotonically non-increasing. Therefore the fundamental idea is to reward any change in the
numerical solution upon refinement, and to penalize any change to the numerical solution upon coarsening. We define
the quantity
                                                   X Z
                                          ∆uh =              |ut+1
                                                               h   − uth | dK                                        (2)
                                                      K∈Th    K

to represent the change in the solution, upon the action At , as is schematically illustrated in Figure 3. The integers t and
t + 1 refer to a time step with respect to the POMDP, not a time integration step in the case of a time-dependent PDE.
We always perform the computation of ∆uh by first interpolating the coarser of the two solutions onto the finer of the
two grids, then performing the integration. This way, the change in solution ∆uh upon refining and coarsening the
same element are identical in magnitude, but with opposite signs.
Naively applying the reward +∆uh upon refinement and −∆uh upon coarsening is logical; however, this choice often
results in an inconsistent reward signal due to scaling. One of the attractive features of high-order finite element methods
is that the error in the numerical solution decreases quickly with respect to the mesh element size for problems with
smooth solutions, typically as 1/hporder where h is a representative size of a mesh element, and porder is the polynomial
order of the scheme [13, 31]. As a result, the error in numerical solutions often spans many orders of magnitude over a
small number of mesh refinement cycles. To account for these large differences in the scale of the error, and to prevent
the initial refinements from dominating the total achievable reward during training, we scale the rewards logarithmically,
awarding the agent
                                      R∆u = ± [log(∆uh + machine ) − log machine ] ,

where the positive and negative signs apply to the cases of refinement and coarsening, respectively. Here, machine is a
representation of machine precision, which we take to be 10−16 , and is included for the edge cases in which refinement
or coarsening does not change the numerical solution. Of course, it can also be a desired accuracy for the numerical
solution. Lastly, the additive factor is chosen to center the positive and negative rewards around zero, rather than
log(machine ) for interpretability, and follows from our specific choice of machine precision.

                             St, At = refine                                            St + 1
                                                                                                 numerical solution
                                                                                                 exact solution
                                                                                                 mesh
                                                                                                  uh




                  RL agent                                           refined element                 RL agent

Figure 3: Schematic of ∆uh upon refinement. The RL agent’s new location is sampled from the belief distribution Bt (Ot , St+1 ).

Cost. We can specify the reward due to the change in computational cost upon action at as the quantity
                                          R∆C = B pt+1 − B pt .
                                                                   
                                                                                                                              (3)
The sign of R∆C is not explicitly dependent on the action at , as it purely relates to the increase or decrease in
computational cost as measured by p before and after the action occurs.
The reward function. Combining the constituent components, the final explicit form of the new reward function that
we employ is
                       
                       + [log(∆uh + machine ) − log(machine )] − γc R∆C ,     if at = refine
          R(st , at ) = − [log(∆uh + machine ) − log(machine )] − γc R∆C ,     if at = coarsen               (4)
                       
                        0,                                                       if at = do nothing

                                                               7
                             Deep Reinforcement Learning for Adaptive Mesh Refinement                           A P REPRINT



2.4   Training and model deployment

To train the model on a static problem, we begin each episode with a very coarse mesh. The agent is placed randomly
on a cell in the mesh; after collecting the reward for each action, the agent is moved to a different element randomly
as described in §2.2. After a large given number of actions have occurred, the episode ends, with early termination
possible in the case of repeated do nothing actions. If at any point the agent exceeds the allotted computational
budget, it receives a large negative reward and the episode terminates (see Appendix C). For time-dependent problems,
the training is similar, although at random intervals, the numerical solution is stepped forward by one time step.
For model deployment, the trained model considers every cell in the mesh sequentially, in the order specified by
the non-conformity estimator, and makes a decision based on the local observation on that particular element. The
percentage of available resources p is updated in between elements so that the model may update its recommendation.
This constitutes the marking process—once every element has been visited, the recommendations of the RL policy can
be executed. This constitutes a single AMR “cycle” for the RL model.



2.5   Policy and deep learning architectures

We now describe the particular architectures we used for our AMR agent. Our deep Q-network [51] is the simplest
policy. It consists of an input layer, the size of which corresponds to the size of the observation space, two hidden-layers,
each with 64 neurons, and an output layer with one neuron for each possible action. Rectified linear units (ReLUs) are
chosen as our activation functions. Taking the argmax of the output yields the action we take (assuming we are using
the optimal policy deterministically).
The Advantage Actor-Critic (A2C) policy [50] uses the same network architecture as the deep Q-network, but it trains
two networks, one to estimate the value function (the critic) and one to determine the optimal policy (the actor). At
each step, the actor chooses an action that the critic evaluates to estimate the state-value and improve the policy of the
actor. Finally, the Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) policy [58] uses the same network architecture as A2C; the
main difference is that PPO uses clipping in the objective function so that policy updates remain relatively small. We
compare the performance of these algorithms in §4.1.1.



2.6   Summary: reinforcement learning framework

The design of the reward function is pivotal in RL. The idea behind the reward signal (4) is illustrated in Figure 3.
When the agent uses resources to refine the solution, it accumulates a reward corresponding to how much the numerical
solution changes as a result of the refinement (R∆u ), and is penalized according to the increased usage of its resource
budget (R∆C ). In the limiting case, in which the solution is perfectly resolved, the agent accrues only penalization
for additional refinement. Conversely, when the agent elects to coarsen the resolution, it is rewarded according to
the resources it saves, but pays for any change in the numerical solution. In the limiting case where the solution is
perfectly resolved with more elements than necessary, the agent receives only reward for decreasing the number of
elements, as the numerical solution does not change upon coarsening. In essence, the reward function provides a signal
which communicates the trade-off between accuracy and computational cost. To preserve the reward signal, the reward
function logarithmically scales and machine-precision-normalizes the quantities R∆u and R∆C , which can span many
orders of magnitude. The hyperparameter γc is a tunable setting that reflects the degree of displeasure incurred upon
using additional resources, effectively weighting the user priority of accuracy versus cost.
By formulating the sequential decision process locally as a POMDP, the observation space provides the link between
the local solution data and its conformity to the cost-benefit trade-off of refinement in that region. Informally speaking,
the observation Ot provides a signal relating local solution conformity to that of the global solution as well as the
remaining computational resources and other potentially relevant data.
We summarize the algorithm for a training time step and model deployment in Figure 4. The notation uth = M(St )
describes running the forward model on the mesh state St to compute the corresponding solution uth by numerically
solving the PDE. The trained policy network is denoted πh (§2.2), and we use the Boolean done as a sentinel for
episode termination. Lastly, we refer to the belief distribution over the mesh cells K ∈ Th at state St as Bt (Ot , St ).
For the architectures we employ (§2.5), we refer to [57] for the complete specification as to how the weights of the
policy network are updated as a result of the training steps taken.


                                                             8
                                Deep Reinforcement Learning for Adaptive Mesh Refinement                                 A P REPRINT



    training_step(At , Ot ):                                           model_deployment(S0 , πh ):
    Kt ← cell corresponding to Ot                                      S 0 ← S0                         R
    if At = refine                                                     {T } ←sort K ∈ Th by ΞK = ∂K Juh Kd ∂K
                                                                             0
       St+1 ← refine Kt                                                For K ∈ {T }
    if At = coarsen                                                        OK 0 ← compute observation space for K 0
       St+1 ← coarsen Kt                                                   AK 0 ← πh (OK 0 ) query policy network
    update ut+1h  = M(St+1 ), pt+1                                         execute action AK 0 , update S 0 , p
    compute ∆uh (on finer mesh) via (2), R∆C via (3)                   compute new solution u0h ← M(S 0 )
    compute Rt+1 via (4)                                               return u0h , S 0
    sample cell Kt+1 ← Bt (Ot , St+1 )
    Ot+1 ← compute observation space for Kt+1
    if pt+1 > 1
       Rt+1 ← large, negative reward
       done ← true
    if iteration ≥ episode iterations
       done ← true
    return Rt+1 , done, Ot+1
    Figure 4: Deep RL-AMR. Algorithms for a single RL training time step (left) and for the deployment of the trained policy over
    a single refinement cycle (right). The training step takes as input an action At and an observation Ot , and returns the reward
    Rt+1 , the Boolean episode termination condition done (default false), and the new observation Ot+1 . The model deployment
    procedure takes as input a trained policy network πh and starting state S0 ; it returns the proposed next mesh state S 0 and the
    updated numerical solution u0h .




3     Finite element spatial discretization and problem physics

3.1    Notation and approximation spaces

In order to state the weak forms of the subsequent problems that follow, we introduce some requisite notation. We let
Th = ∪i Ki be a finite collection of non-overlapping elements Ki that discretizes the entire problem domain Ω ⊂ Rd .
We refer to the boundary of the problem domain as Γ. The set ∂Th = {∂K : K ∈ Th } refers to all boundary edges and
interfaces of the elements, where ∂K is the boundary of element K. For two elements K + and K − sharing an edge,
we define e = ∂K + ∩ ∂K − as the edge between elements K + and K − . Each edge can be classified as belonging to
either ε◦ or ε∂ , the set of interior and boundary edges, respectively, with ε = ε◦ ∪ ε∂ .
The elements K + and K − have outward pointing unit normals n+ and n− , respectively. The quantities a± denote the
traces of a on the edge e from the interior of K ± . When relevant for element-wise operations, we take as convention
that the element K − refers to the local element, and K + to the neighboring element. The jump J·K operator for scalar
quantities are then defined as JaK = a− − a+ on the interior faces e ∈ ε◦ . On the set of boundary faces e ∈ ε∂ , we can
unambiguously refer to a single-valued trace and outward facing normal n on Γ. Lastly, we define the inner products
over a set D ⊂ Rd and its boundary ∂D ⊂ Rd−1 using typical discontinuous Galerkin finite element notation as
                                                  Z                                 Z
                                      (c, d)D =         cd dD,         hc, di∂D =        cd d∂D.
                                                    D                               ∂D



Let P porder (D) denote the set of polynomials of degree porder on a domain D. We consider the discontinuous finite
element spaces

                                  Whporder = w ∈ L2 (Ω) : w K ∈ W porder (K) ∀K ∈ Th ,
                                            
                                            n            d                              o
                                  Vhporder = v ∈ L2 (Ω) : v K ∈ V porder (K) ∀K ∈ Th ,
                                                 

                                  Mhporder = µ ∈ L2 (εh ) : µ e ∈ P porder (e) ∀e ∈ εh ,
                                            


where L2 (Ω) is the space of square-integrable functions on the domain Ω. Informally, Whporder represents the space of
piecewise discontinuous polynomials of degree at most porder on every element in the mesh.


                                                                   9
                              Deep Reinforcement Learning for Adaptive Mesh Refinement                             A P REPRINT



3.2   Linear advection equation

We will consider the linear advection equation
                                            ∂u
                                               + ∇ · (cu) = f                 in Ω,
                                            ∂t                                                                              (5)
                                                        u = gD              on Γin ,
on the domain Ω with boundary Γ separated into inflow and outflow regions Γ = Γin ∪ Γout , that are defined according
to the continuous, divergence-free advection velocity field c and outward normal n,
                                                 Γin = {x ∈ Γ : c · n ≤ 0} ,
                                                Γout = {x ∈ Γ : c · n > 0} .
The linear advection problem defined in equation (5) admits the following semi-discrete discontinuous Galerkin
discretization [16, 43]: we seek uh ∈ Whporder such that
              
          ∂uh
       w,           − (∇w, cuh )Th + hJwK, u∗ (c · n)iε◦ + hw, uh (c · n)iΓout = (w, f )Th − hw, gD (c · n)iΓin ,
            ∂t Th

for all w ∈ Whporder . There are many choices for the single-valued, inter-element numerical flux u∗ . To mimic the
physics of the problem, we use the common upwinded flux
                                                     +
                                               ∗      uh , c · n < 0
                                              u =
                                                      u−h , c · n ≥ 0.

In the steady case, the time derivative term is set to zero. In the unsteady case, a standard explicit time-integration
scheme can be used for temporal discretization using a method of lines approach [31]; we use LSERK-45 [15].

3.3   Advection-diffusion equation

To demonstrate that the methodology generalizes well across different problem physics as well as across different finite
element discretizations, we will consider the advection-diffusion equation, which includes as a subset second-order
Poisson-like problems. Namely, we consider the set of problems described by the PDE
                                     ∂u
                                        + ∇ · (cu) − ∇ · (κ∇u) = f,              in Ω
                                     ∂t
                                              (−κ∇u + cu) · n = gN ,              on ΓN ,                                   (6)
                                                             u = gD ,             on ΓD ,
where ΓD and ΓN denote the Dirichlet and Neumann segments of the boundary, respectively. The problem in equation
(6) admits a hybridizable discontinuous Galerkin (HDG) formulation, developed in [54]: we seek (qh , uh , ûh ) ∈
Vhporder × Whporder × Mhporder such that

                                                 v, κ−1 qh T − (∇ · v, uh )Th + hv · n, ûh i∂Th = 0
                                                          
                                                             h
             
          ∂uh
      w,             − (∇w, cuh )Th + (w, ∇ · qh )Th + (w, (c · n)ûh )∂Th + hw, τ (uh − ûh )i∂Th = (w, f )Th (7)
           ∂t Th
                                                           hµ, qh · n + (c · n)ûh + τ (uh − ûh )i∂Th = hµ, gN i∂Th

for all (v, w, µ) ∈ Vhporder × Whporder × Mhporder . We take the diffusion coefficient κ = 1, choose the stabilization parameter
τ = κ/` + |c · n|, where we use as a diffusion length scale ` = 1/5. In order to solve Poisson-like problems, we set the
convective velocity field c to zero. In the unsteady case, an implicit time-integration scheme can be applied for the
temporal discretization; we use the third-order backward difference formulae (BDF3). We refer the reader to [54] for a
thorough discussion of these choices.

3.4   Error indicators and AMR heuristics

For the test cases in §4, we benchmark the RL policy against two common AMR heuristics, the Kelly Error indicator
and a gradient indicator. The indicators are shown in Table 1.


                                                              10
                               Deep Reinforcement Learning for Adaptive Mesh Refinement                        A P REPRINT



                  Error indicator               faces F = K ∩ K 0                    boundary face ΓN
                                                     Z s        {2
                                            X               ∂uh                                      2
                                                                                   nF F gN − a ∂u
                                                                                     R
                       Kelly                      cF      a         dF                           ∂n
                                                                                                   h
                                                                                                       dF
                                                        F   ∂n
                                           F ∈∂K
                                            X yK 0 uh (xK 0 ) − uh (xK )
                  Gradient-based       Y −1                                                       -
                                              0
                                                 kyK 0 k      kyK 0 k
                                             K

                                    Table 1: Cell-wise error indicators, contributions by face.


The Kelly indicator uses parameters cF = nF = hK /24 for element width hK . The approximate gradient is formed
                            0
using the distance vectors yK = x0K − xK between the cell centers of element K and its neighbors K 0 , as well as the
matrix
                                               X  yK 0 y T 0 
                                                                K
                                          Y =                          .
                                                 0
                                                     ky K 0 k kyK 0 k
                                                        K

We scale the approximate gradient ∇u ˜ h in Table 1 by a power of the mesh width, using h1+d/2 ∇u     ˜ h . To execute
                                                                                             K
an AMR strategy based on either of these estimators, we use either a bulk or fixed fraction rule. As described in §1,
a bulk strategy refines and coarsens the cells in which the top and bottom percentages of the estimated error occurs;
therefore the actual number of cells coarsened or refined is entirely dependent on the estimate. On the other hand,
a fixed-fraction refinement strategy sorts the cells according to their error estimates and refines and coarsens a top
and bottom percentage of the total number of cells. We denote these strategies as bulk(refine percentage, coarsen
percentage) and, similarly fixed(·, ·); e.g., fixed(0.4, 0.6) refers to an AMR strategy where the top 40 percent of cells
in terms of their estimated error are refined and the bottom 60 percent are coarsened. For additional details on both
these indicators and refinement strategies, see [2].

3.5   Numerical implementation

The finite element forward models were implemented in C++ and make use of the finite element library deal.ii [2].
The POMDP characterizing the RL environment was implemented using the OpenAI Gym framework [14], and the
custom deep RL architectures were implemented in the open-source RL framework Stable-Baselines 3 [57].
Unless otherwise specified, the policy architecture used is A2C, and the hyperparameter γc = 25 (see §2.3, §4.1),
which we empirically found to give good performance over a wide range of test cases. Additional values of training
parameters are given in Appendix C. As is typical in deep RL, the particular number of training time steps used is not
particularly meaningful as compared to the order of magnitude of the total number of steps (see discussion in §4.1.1),
as long as the policy network is given sufficient time to increase its mean episodic reward significantly from its starting
performance. For all experiments, we used on the order of 105 RL training time steps, consisting of 100-200 time step
episodes, and training took on the order of 1-3 hours on a desktop computer without GPU acceleration. More detailed
benchmarking would be extraneous, as performance in terms of training time is dominated by the cost of running the
numerical solver rather than updating the policy network, for all but trivial problems.
All linear systems arising from the finite element discretizations are solved using direct solvers (UMFPACK) to avoid
the complicating factors of iterative solver tolerances and stopping criteria. All surface and volume integral operators are
discretized with Gaussian quadrature using porder + 1 one-dimensional (1D) quadrature points in each spatial direction,
where porder is the polynomial order of the finite element space Whporder .
L2 -errors, when shown, are computed as a post-processing step using a known exact solution and numerically integrated
using porder + 3 Gaussian quadrature points in each spatial direction to ensure that the calculation of errors is not
adversely affected by integration error. We re-emphasize that no exact solutions are used at any point during training or
deployment of the RL model itself.

4     Numerical experiments
The numerical experiments in this section are designed to demonstrate the features and performance of the deep RL
AMR (DRL-AMR) approach. We start with a 1D, steady linear advection problem in §4.1 as an illustrative example to
exhibit the feasibility of the approach and to demonstratively explore the characteristics of the RL policy. We provide a
discussion of details related to training and model evaluation, as well as performance comparisons between different RL
algorithms, to which the simplicity and interpretability of the test case lend itself well.


                                                                11
                             Deep Reinforcement Learning for Adaptive Mesh Refinement                            A P REPRINT



Subsequent sections focus on the performance and generalizability of the approach. We use the same trained RL model
in §4.1, but apply it to a different linear advection problem in §4.2 to demonstrate generalization of the policy to
different boundary conditions and forcing functions. To show the generalization of the method to unsteady dynamics,
we train a model on a 1D time-dependent advection problem in §4.3. Lastly, to support the claim that the approach is
not specific to a particular PDE or finite element scheme, we apply the DRL-AMR framework to the Poisson equation
discretized with an HDG scheme (§3.3). As the Poisson equation is a second-order, elliptic PDE, its solutions are
characterized by different physics than the hyperbolic, first-order advection problems solved in §(4.1-4.3). Similarly, as
HDG schemes are mixed methods, their formulation (7) involves vector-valued finite element spaces and use of a traced
finite element space [54] on the mesh skeleton; that is, the underlying numerical method is significantly different than
those used for the solution of the advection equation (cf. (3.2)).
To show that the methods are not relegated to small or one-dimensional problems and that the RL approach generalizes
to higher spatial dimensions and larger, more complex problems, we examine the performance of deep RL policies
trained on 2D problems in §(4.5-4.6). The steady advection problem in §4.5 allows evaluation of the methodology in the
context of the two-dimensional generalization of the problem in §4.1. The steady advection-diffusion problem in §4.6
examines the effectiveness of the deep RL policy when both advection and diffusion processes occur, and highlights
its ability to detect and resolve non-trivial features in an automated way by using solution smoothness. The unsteady
advection problem in §4.7 shows the ability of the method to preserve salient physical features of a numerical solution
over long-time integration horizons. Throughout the entire set of numerical experiments, we focus on the goal stated in
the introduction of providing a solution that captures all physically relevant features of a numerical solution efficiently
in terms of problem degrees of freedom, avoiding spurious diffusion and dispersion effects due to under-resolution.

4.1   Steady 1D linear advection

For proof-of-concept, we consider the linear advection equation described in §3.2 on the 1D spatial domain Ω = [0, 1].
We choose the boundary conditions gD at the inlet and forcing function f such that the exact solution takes the form
                                          u(x) = 1 − tanh [α(1 − 4(x − 1/4))] ,
where the steepness parameter α = 10. As the exact solution has the form of a smooth step function, the resultant
meshes and numerical solutions are easily interpretable—resolution should be concentrated in the steep gradient region
around the “step”. In light of this, we will use this illustrative example to demonstrate the features of the trained deep
RL policy, as well as the details of training and model deployment. Subsequent sections will focus on generalizability.
Using a numerical solution of polynomial order porder = 3, we train the RL-agent for 20·103 episodes on a computational
“budget” of 25 cells (§3.5). However, at the time of model deployment, we are free to give the trained RL policy
whatever budget we wish; we emphasize that this is because in general, we would like to train our model on much
cheaper problems than those we intend to solve.
During deployment, starting with a very coarse mesh consisting of 4 elements, we perform 6 AMR cycles comparing
the DRL-AMR model to an AMR heuristic that attempts to refine the elements responsible for the top 50 percent of the
total error and attempts to coarsen the elements responsible for the bottom 50 percent of total error as measured by the
approximate gradient error indicator (Table 1). That is, a bulk(0.5, 0.5) strategy (see §3.4). We expect this heuristic
indicator to perform well, as this test case has only one feature, the steep gradient in the center of the domain.

                          40 cells used                                     15/25 cells used
          2                                                  2

          1                                                  1

          0                                                  0

              0.0               0.5               1.0             0.0              0.5               1.0
                         (a) AMR heuristic                                       (b) RL Agent
Figure 5: Steady 1D linear advection (§4.1). Numerical solution with the mesh resulting from 6 cycles of refinement, using the
approximate gradient error indicator as an AMR heuristic and the deep RL policy resulting from training. The exact solution is
overlaid in both cases for comparison.


                                                             12
                                    Deep Reinforcement Learning for Adaptive Mesh Refinement                                         A P REPRINT



Figure 5 shows the numerical solution and meshes proposed by the two approaches. We see that the deep RL agent
deployed with a 25-cell budget is able to find a high-quality solution with fewer elements than that of the AMR
heuristic recommendation. This is corroborated by the more precise comparison in Figure 6, which shows that at model
deployments with budgets of 25 and 500 cells, the RL agent outperforms the AMR heuristic over six refinement cycles
in terms of L2 accuracy per degree of freedom. That is, the RL policy provides a numerical solution of approximately
the same accuracy as that of the AMR heuristic, but does so with fewer degrees of freedom after the refinement cycles,
both on the problem size it was trained on, as well as at a much larger problem size.

                     100                          RL agent                        100                               RL agent
                                                  AMR heuristic                                                     AMR heuristic
                                                                                 10 1
                    10 1
                                                                                 10 2

        L 2-Error   10 2                                             L 2-Error
                                                                                 10 3

                    10 3                                                         10 4

                                                                                 10 5
                    10 4
                           20     40      60         80       100                       0   50     100   150    200      250   300
                                  Degrees of freedom                                                Degrees of freedom
                                (a) 25 cell budget                                               (b) 500 cell budget
                                                          2
Figure 6: Steady 1D linear advection (§4.1). L -error plotted against problem degrees of freedom over 6 cycles of refinement, using
the gradient-based error indicator as an AMR heuristic and the deep RL policy: (6a) deployed with a computational budget of 25
elements; (6b) with a computational budget of 500 elements.

Although for 1D problems, differences in problem degrees of freedom are small, this example illustrates the central
difference between the learned policy and the classical AMR approaches. AMR algorithms mark cells for refinement
either in terms of the estimated volume fraction of total error in the case of bulk refinement or by a certain number
of cells in the case of fixed-number refinement. In either case, the AMR algorithms rely on estimators purely to
decide which cells to refine, but the actual refinement behavior is in some sense, specified a priori. Similarly, the
commonly-used way to prevent AMR heuristics from continuing to refine beyond a computational limit is to manually
specify a max refinement depth, again an a priori choice uninformed by the particulars of the solver or PDE, and
specified everywhere. The DRL-AMR approach, in contrast, not only estimates which cells are likely responsible for a
disproportionately large or small share of the total error but also estimates a stopping point, beyond which the solution
smoothness indicates that additional decreases in error are likely to be marginal from the perspective of adding new
unresolved features to the solution. This is because, during training, the RL agent is given global information related
to available computational resources, which it balances against the expectation of change in the solution upon local
refinement, with respect to computational cost.
Where the stopping point occurs, in terms of the solution error, is controllable through the hyperparameter γc . A larger
value of γc means a cheaper numerical solution with a greater aversion to incurring a cost. On the other hand, a small
value of γc will result in a numerical solution with a lower error and less tolerance for interface jumps. Informally,
γc is a user-specified setting indicating the trade-off between cost and accuracy, and is a way to inform the agent
“how good” versus “how cheap” to make the solution. In appendix A, we provide an approach to remove γc as a
training hyperparameter entirely, and instead make it a user-chosen value during deployment by modifying the policy
architecture; however, this discussion is beyond the scope of the main contributions of this paper, and we train using a
single value of γc for all of the numerical experiments in this section. Next, we explore the training and deployment
behavior of the RL policy for this simple case to better understand the model.

4.1.1         Training and deployment considerations
Initialization. At the start of each training episode, we can either allow the RL agent to begin on the coarsest possible
mesh (coarse initialization) or initialize the mesh to a random state by performing a random number of refinements.
Random initialization and coarse initialization perform similarly for the small problem sizes on which they are trained;
however, per unit training time, we find that random initialization often yields better policies when deployed on


                                                                    13
                                                 Deep Reinforcement Learning for Adaptive Mesh Refinement                                       A P REPRINT



                            300                                                                         100                         random initialization
                                                                                                                                    coarse initialization
                            200                                                                         10 1




      Mean episode reward
                            100
                                                                                                        10 2
                             0                                                              L 2-Error   10 3
                            100
                                                                                  DQN                   10 4
                            200                                                   A2C
                                                                                  PPO                   10 5
                            300
                                          5000      10000 15000 20000               25000                      0         100      200        300        400
                                                     Training timestep                                                     Degrees of freedom
                                  (a) DRL-AMR algorithm performance over training                                  (b) Mesh initialization
Figure 7: For the steady linear advection test in §4.1: (a) Performance achieved during training for different deep RL training
algorithms, as measured by average episode reward (solid lines). Shaded bands indicate the sample variance of the reward over the
episode. (b) Performance of DRL-AMR models trained using random state initialization and coarse initialization, as measured by
L2 -Error per degree of freedom over 6 refinement cycles (on a 25-cell budget example and deployed with a 500-cell budget).



substantially larger problems. Figure 7b compares the performance of two DRL-AMR models trained for 105 training
time steps, one with the mesh in a coarse state at the beginning of each episode, and the other with a mesh in a random
state at the beginning of each episode. Both models were trained on the linear advection problem in §4.1 with a
maximum budget of 25 cells but were deployed with a budget of 500 cells over six refinement cycles. Comparing the
accuracy with the problem degrees of freedom, it is clear that the model trained with random initialization significantly
outperforms the model with coarse initialization. Both models begin the refinement cycle on the same coarse mesh
during deployment. The model trained with random initialization finds a solution of the same accuracy but uses only
half the elements as the model trained with coarse initialization. We obtained similar results for other test cases we ran.
We hypothesize that random initialization during training leads to a more aggressive exploration of the action space
and produces better results because initializing the mesh to a random state produces regions that are over-refined
and under-refined. On the other hand, initialization on a coarse mesh tends to produce an under-resolved solution
everywhere, leading the agent to become biased towards refinement during deployment. As might be expected, in the
limit of long training times, performance becomes comparable between the two initialization strategies.
In light of these performance advantages, all results shown correspond to models trained using random initialization.
Learning algorithms. The performance—as measured by mean episodic reward—for the three RL policy architectures
(DQN, A2C, and PPO, see §2.5) are shown in Figure 7a. The sample variance bands are found to tighten non-
monotonically over the training duration, indicating more consistent performance. All three algorithms achieve similar
mean reward and variance after roughly 25,000 training time steps, successfully solving the problem. However, as
is common in RL problems, the model performance during training is non-monotonic, and it is advantageous to
periodically save the most performant model state for deployment, rather than deploying the policy occurring at the end
of the training window. In general, we have not found any particular architecture to be consistently better in terms of
performance over the set of test cases considered in this paper. We note however that we have not yet attempted to
accelerate the training process through optimization of training parameters such as batch size and episode length.
Model deployment. Unlike the AMR heuristic, the deployed DRL-AMR model finds solutions by apportioning
computational resources over the mesh in a way that handles the smoothness/efficiency trade-off, then changes the mesh
topology over the subsequent refinement cycles in order to increase accuracy. This is the sense in which the algorithm
considers a richer set of strategies than a purely greedy strategy.
Figure 8 shows the mesh and resultant numerical solution over a set of six refinement cycles. Although cycles 2-6 all
contain the order of 10 elements, the topology of their allocation over the domain changes to concentrate around the
steep gradient region. This showcases a particular strength of the method: namely, that the decision of the number of
elements to use during the exploratory cycles while preserving solution smoothness is delegated to the machine learning
model, rather than manually needing to be specified. This allows the number of elements to increase and decrease
exploratively, as opposed to AMR heuristics, which must increase or decrease the number of elements according to the
error estimator or by a fixed number.


                                                                             14
                                                  Deep Reinforcement Learning for Adaptive Mesh Refinement                                             A P REPRINT



                                                             numerical solution                 mesh            exact solution
                     Cycle 1: 6/25 cells used                                  Cycle 2: 10/25 cells used                        Cycle 3: 11/25 cells used
       2                                                             2                                               2
       1                                                             1                                               1
       0                                                             0                                               0

           0.0              0.5             1.0                          0.0             0.5             1.0              0.0             0.5             1.0
                  Cycle 4: 11/25 cells used                                    Cycle 5: 13/25 cells used                        Cycle 6: 11/25 cells used
       2                                                             2                                               2
       1                                                             1                                               1
       0                                                             0                                               0

           0.0                              0.5             1.0          0.0                0.5               1.0         0.0              0.5              1.0
Figure 8: Steady 1D linear advection (§4.1). State of the numerical solution and mesh during the deployment of the deep RL agent
AMR policy, over six refinement cycles.


In practice, the cost of each cycle depends on the problem size but we find that the trained RL policies reach a converged
mesh state in a few cycles, typically around 5-10, independent of problem size. This is in part because the number of
cells can potentially double or halve every cycle, so locally under-resolved regions either become resolved very quickly,
or the computational budget is approached and refinement recommendations become more conservative.
Introspection of the neural network model. As an RL policy is ultimately a trained neural network, we can query the
neural network in order to introspect the policy suggestions. In practice, this space is high-dimensional—the input to the
network is a vector of dimension equal to that of the observation space. However, insight can be gained by considering
a model trained on a reduced observation space.

                                               p = 0.3 budget used                      p = 0.5 budget used                     p = 0.7 budget used



             mean log boundary jump
                                      4                                        4                                      4




               (over entire mesh)
                                      8                                        8                                      8

                                      12                                       12                                    12

                                      16                                       16                                    16
                                           16      12     8       4                 16      12     8       4              16      12     8       4
                                             local log boundary jump                  local log boundary jump               local log boundary jump
Figure 9: Policy network recommendation as a function of a simplified observation space. Decision boundaries are shown between
network recommendations to coarsen (blue), do nothing (grey), and refine (salmon). The dashed line indicates where the local
boundary jump is the same as the mean cell-wise boundary jump over the entire mesh.

Figure 9 shows the recommendation of a model trained on the problem in §4.1 using a value γ = 25 and a simplified
observation space consisting only of the cell boundary jump, the mean boundary jump over all cells, and the current
use of computational resources p. We consider a range of [-16, -1] in log space, as these are the range of jump
values encountered by the network for this test case; recommendations outside of this region are uninformed by
data encountered during training. Each subfigure shows the decision boundary regions corresponding to the action
recommended by the policy. Although the observation space has been simplified, the overall model is qualitatively
discernible and interpretable. At low use of computational resources (p = 0.3), the model suggests mostly refinement,
even in regions where the observed boundary jump is significantly lower than the average over the entire mesh. We
hypothesize that this corresponds to exploratory refinement in some sense. At moderate use of computational resources
(p = 0.5), the model provides more conservative recommendations, suggesting refinement where the local boundary
jump exceeds the mesh mean and is not less than 10−8 in terms of magnitude. When computational resources become


                                                                                           15
                                  Deep Reinforcement Learning for Adaptive Mesh Refinement                                           A P REPRINT



scarce (p = 0.7), the model suggests coarsening except in regions where the local log boundary jump is much
greater than the mean. The decision boundaries are highly nonlinear, even for this simplified observation space. This
demonstrates the potential power and flexibility of the DRL-AMR approach, as it learns complex relationships between
any physical relevant information included in the observation space and the utility of coarsening or refining.

4.2      Generalization to different boundary conditions and forcing functions

We deploy the same trained DRL-AMR model in §4.1 to the same PDE, but on a different domain Ω = (−4, 4), with
a different set of boundary conditions and forcing. We choose the boundary conditions gD at the inlet and forcing
function f such that the exact solution takes the form
                                                                    
                                                                 1 2
                                            u(x) = sin(nx) exp − x .
                                                                 2

At the time of model deployment, we give the trained RL policy a budget of 100 elements. We evaluate the model
over 6 AMR cycles this time using an AMR heuristic which makes use of the Kelly error indicator (Table 1, [37]) and
implements a fixed(0.5, 0.1) strategy, as described in §3.4.

                              38/100 cells used                                                            11/100 cells used
   1.5                                                                           1.5
                                                       exact solution                                                              exact solution
   1.0                                                 numerical solution        1.0                                               numerical solution
   0.5                                                 mesh                      0.5                                               mesh

   0.0                                                                           0.0
   0.5                                                                           0.5
   1.0                                                                           1.0
   1.5                                                                           1.5
           4    3     2       1      0        1    2        3         4                   4       3   2     1     0        1   2        3         4

                          (a) AMR heuristic                                                               (b) RL Agent
Figure 10: DRL-AMR model trained on the test case in §4.1 but deployed on the problem in equation (4.2). Numerical solution
with the mesh resulting from 6 cycles of refinement, using the Kelly error indicator as an AMR heuristic and the RL policy resulting
from training. The exact solution is overlaid in both cases for comparison.


The final mesh and numerical solution for both is shown in Figure 10. Our findings are similar to the test case in the
previous section. Both methods find a mesh and corresponding numerical solution that very closely matches the exact
solution, however, the RL policy finds a coarse mesh on which the solution is well represented and stops refinement
past the fourth refinement cycle. Similar to Figure 6, after the six refinement cycles, the RL policy returns a mesh that
provides strictly better accuracy per problem degree of freedom (not shown).
This highlights the generality of the method; the RL policy did not suggest refining close to the center of the domain as
it did for the example in §4.1. This is to be expected, as the RL agent is never given global location information during
training, only local cell information along with the surrounding interface jumps; therefore it’s impossible to over-fit the
RL agent to a specific training example during training. However, we remark that if the agent were trained against a
pathological example such as the Weierstrass function, where the correct action could always be to refine, this will be
reflected in the trained model, although this can hardly be considered overfitting. Because the agent learns to relate
features of the PDE and local jumps to the local smoothness of the solution, we find that the agent generalizes well
across different test cases from the same PDE. This is an important characteristic of the approach, as we wish to deploy
the trained model on problems of interest other than the subset on which the model was trained.

4.3      Unsteady 1D linear advection

As an extension to the steady experiments, we consider the time-dependent Sommerfeld wave equation
                                                  ∂u ∂u
                                                     +    =0                     in Ω × [0, T ],
                                                  ∂t   ∂x
                                                        u = gD                         on Γin ,
                                                                                               
                                                                                  1           2
                                                           u0 = exp                   (x − µ)     ,
                                                                                 2σ 2

                                                                            16
                             Deep Reinforcement Learning for Adaptive Mesh Refinement                           A P REPRINT



on the computational domain Ω = (−4, 4). The Dirichlet boundary condition gD (t) at the inlet is chosen according
to the exact solution to the time-dependent wave equation uexact = u0 (x − t). The scalar constants are µ = −4 and
σ 2 = 0.25. The outlet boundary of the domain is taken to be an outflow condition. We consider numerical solutions at
a polynomial order porder = 3.




                         (a) AMR heuristic                                           (b) RL policy
Figure 11: Unsteady 1D linear advection. Numerical solution with time-dependent AMR policies using a gradient-based heuristic,
and the trained RL policy. Results shown at times T = 1.6 (top), T = 4.2 (middle), and T = 6.9 (bottom).



We train the DRL-AMR model for 50 · 103 RL time steps using the time-dependent solver and training procedure
as detailed in §2.4 with a computational budget of 25 elements and using a scaling factor value γc = 100 to render
a relatively coarse numerical solution (1), as the computational cost is more heavily penalized. All other training
parameters assume the default values (§3.5). For the AMR heuristic, we employ a gradient indicator (Table 1), that
uses an approximation to the gradient of the numerical solution to estimate the error. Given the fast-decaying tails of
the Gaussian pulse being advected, the gradient-based refinement indicator can be expected to accurately recommend
coarsening outside of the pulse.
During deployment, we allow the AMR heuristic and the RL policy to perform one cycle of refinement/coarsening at
every time step before advancing the numerical solution in time. We consider an increased budget of 100 elements for
both, although we don’t explicitly enforce this requirement for the AMR heuristic; rather, we perform a bulk-refinement
approach where we refine the cells responsible for the top 50 percent of the numerical error as measured by the gradient
indicator, and coarsen the bottom 50 percent of the numerical error as measured by the same, i.e., a bulk(0.5, 0.5)
strategy. Using a time step ∆t = 0.01, we simulate to a final time of T = 7.
The results are shown in Figure 11. Similar to the other experiments, we find that both algorithms are able to capture
the advection of the initial condition; the RL policy does so using a computational mesh with far fewer elements than
the AMR heuristic.
Namely, the DRL-AMR model is able to preserve the features of the solution while using fewer than 25 percent of the
computational cost incurred by the AMR heuristic. Due to the increased value of γc as compared to the other numerical
experiments considered thus far, the RL agent is more tolerant of a lack of smoothness in the solution. This is reflected
in the small discontinuities of the numerical solution at the location x = 0 at t = 1.6 and at x = 2 at t = 6.9.


                                                             17
                                Deep Reinforcement Learning for Adaptive Mesh Refinement                                            A P REPRINT



4.4   Generalization to different PDEs

To demonstrate that the DRL-AMR approach is not specific to the advection equation considered above, we apply it to
the second-order Poisson equation, a subset of advection-diffusion PDEs (§3.3).
                                                     ∂2u
                                                 −       =f         in Ω = (−1, 1),                                                            (8)
                                                     ∂x2
with mixed boundary conditions consisting of a Dirichlet condition u = gD on boundary ΓD = {−1} and Neumann
condition ∇u · n = gN on boundary ΓN = {1}. The boundary conditions and forcing function are deduced from the
exact solution, chosen to be a superposition of Gaussian functions
                                                3
                                                                 (x − ri )2
                                                                           
                                              X     1
                                         u=        √ exp −                                                (9)
                                              i=1
                                                  σ 2π              σ2

with parameters r1 = −1/3, r2 = 0, r3 = 1/3 and σ = 1/10. We discretize the problem using HDG finite elements
as described in §3.3, with polynomial order porder = 3. We set the diffusivity coefficient κ = 1 and the convective
velocity c = 0.

                                                                                             10 1
                                                                                                                               RL agent
                                                                                                                               AMR heuristic
                                    28/36 cells used
       4                                                                                     10 2


       2                                                                         L 2-Error
                                                                                             10 3


       0
                                                                                             10 4
             1                              0                              1                        50   100   150    200     250    300
                                                                                                               Degrees of freedom


Figure 12: Steady 1D Poisson problem (8). (Left) Mesh distribution and corresponding numerical solution resulting from 6 cycles of
refinement using the trained RL policy with a budget of 36 cells; the exact solution (9) (black, dashed line) is overlaid for comparison.
(Right) L2 -Error of the numerical solution vs problem degrees of freedom over 6 mesh refinement cycles for the RL agent and the
Kelly error estimator as AMR heuristic.

Results of the trained RL policy are shown in Figure 12. Here we train for 2 · 105 training time steps, and all non-
specified training parameters assume the default values (§3.5). We see that the features of the solution are well resolved,
and match the exact solution.
Furthermore, the trained policy identifies regions on the outer edges of the Gaussian mixture as in need of refinement;
we hypothesize that this region is specifically sensitive to Gibbs phenomena caused by the change from a near-zero
solution to a non-trivial one. The more precise comparison between L2 -error and problem degrees of freedom in Figure
12 shows that the DRL-AMR model outperforms the AMR heuristic. As the Kelly error indicator was specifically
designed for this type of Poisson problem and can be referred to as an error estimator in this context, the fact that the
RL policy is competitive is an encouraging result.
Lastly, the PDE in (8) is elliptic. Errors in the solution are therefore well-known to be globally propagated over the
domain, in contrast to the advection equation, where errors are advected along with the solution [46, 61]. The fact that
the RL methodology was nonetheless able to satisfactorily solve the problem lends credence to the POMDP formulation
and use of a local observation space during training.

4.5   Steady 2D linear advection

To examine the generalizability and performance in the context of larger, higher-dimensional problems, we solve the
steady version of the linear advection equation (§3.2) on the two-dimensional (2D) spatial domain Ω = (0, 1)2 with


                                                                  18
                             Deep Reinforcement Learning for Adaptive Mesh Refinement                                            A P REPRINT



a circular, counter-clockwise convective velocity field c(x) = 1/ kxk2 (−x2 , x1 ). On the inflow boundary Γin , we
specify the boundary condition gD according to the chosen solution,

                                            u(r) = 1 − tanh (α(1 − 4(r − x0 ))) ,                                                       (10)

where r denotes the radius in cylindrical coordinates. We use the parameters α = 10, x0 = 1/4 and forcing function
f = 0. The exact solution is a two-dimensional, cylindrical coordinate generalization of the test case considered in
§4.1; that is, the solution contains a smooth, steep gradient. However, unlike the test case in §4.1, due to the higher
problem dimensionality, the steep gradient is present both in the domain interior as well as at the domain boundary.

             1.0                                                         1.0
                                                              1.1                                                         1.1

             0.8                                                         0.8


             0.6                                                         0.6
                                                              0.5                                                         0.5
             0.4                                                         0.4


             0.2                                                         0.2

                                                              -0.1                                                        -0.1
             0.0                                                         0.0
                0.0    0.2     0.4    0.6      0.8      1.0                 0.0       0.2     0.4    0.6     0.8    1.0

                        (a) AMR gradient heuristic                                            (b) RL Agent
             0.6                                                         0.6
                                                              1.1                                                         1.1




                                                              0.5                                                         0.5




                                                              -0.1                                                        -0.1
             0.4                                                         0.4
                0.0                                     0.2                 0.0                                     0.2

            (c) AMR gradient heuristic (zoom, outflow boundary)                   (d) RL Agent (zoom, outflow boundary)
Figure 13: Steady 2D linear advection. Numerical solution overlaid with the mesh refined using a gradient-based error indicator
and the RL policy (1000 cell budget). (Top row) Entire problem domain. (Bottom row) Zoomed-in portion of the domain where the
steep gradient meets the left outflow boundary.


To train the network, we solve the linear advection problem

                                                     ∇ · (cu) = 0,                in Ω,
                                                         u = u(r),                in Γin

using the DG discretization given in §3.2 with elements of polynomial order porder = 2, and deploy the model on the
same problem. However, we train the RL policy network with a resource budget of only 110 cells, limiting the learning
process to a relatively small number of elements compared to the deployment budgets; all other training parameters are
the default values (§3.5). After 2 · 105 training, time steps, we deploy the trained RL policy over a series of 6 refinement
cycles, starting with a coarse mesh of 25 elements with 5 elements in each direction.


                                                                    19
                               Deep Reinforcement Learning for Adaptive Mesh Refinement                       A P REPRINT



                                                10 1                     RL agent, 200 cells
                                                                         RL agent, 1500 cells
                                                                         RL agent, 5000 cells
                                                                         AMR heuristic
                                                10 2


                                    L 2-Error   10 3


                                                10 4


                                                10 5
                                                       0   10000     20000   30000    40000
                                                               Degrees of freedom
Figure 14: Steady 2D linear advection. L2 error as a function of the number of degrees of freedom for the refinement cycles
resulting from a gradient-based error indicator and the RL policy.


We compare the performance of the RL agent to the gradient-based error indicator (Table 1) that uses a bulk(0.5, 0.5)
refinement strategy. Similar to the test case considered in §4.1, this AMR heuristic can be expected to perform well,
given the steep gradient as the dominant feature of the exact solution.
We compare the overall L2 error of the resulting solution with the number of degrees of freedom resulting from the
numerical discretization at each level of the refinement cycle in Figure 14, showing results for the RL policy deployed at
different cell budgets. We consider deployment budgets of 200, 1500, and 5000 elements. By the final refinement cycle,
the RL policy finds a solution of comparable or better accuracy than the AMR heuristic for the same number of degrees
of freedom. In particular, with a budget of 5000 cells, the RL agent substantially outperforms the AMR heuristic.
To shed light on why the RL policy is able to outperform the heuristic, numerical solutions with the overlaid meshes
proposed by the two approaches are shown in Figure 13. In this figure, the RL policy has been deployed with a budget
of 1000 cells; it makes use of roughly 2/3 of its budget allocation by the final refinement cycle. Qualitatively, both
approaches are able to resolve the steep gradient; however, compared to the AMR heuristic, the RL agent has much
more conservatively refined the mesh around the slope. Instead, the RL agent refines preferentially in the region where
the steep gradient encounters the outflow boundary (cf. Figure 13c and Figure 13d). That is, in training, the RL agent
learned that the numerical solution is sensitive to the discontinuities arising where the gradient meets the outflow
boundary. Although the agent has no information on where cells are located, the cells in this problem region exhibited
behaviors in their observation space that indicated the numerical solution would improve by refining them. That is
to say, the RL policy learned a non-trivial, spatially-heterogeneous strategy for regional refinement. In contrast, the
gradient-based indicator detected the steep discontinuity but was not able to exploit the sensitivity of the error to the
resolution close to the outflow boundary.

4.6   Steady 2D advection-diffusion equation

Section §4.5 involves a relatively simple numerical solution, in the sense that the only interesting solution feature is
the steep gradient region. It is natural to ask whether the methodology can capture solutions with more complicated
features. In this section, we turn our attention to the advection-diffusion problem (6) with mixed boundary conditions,
and the less straightforward hybridizable finite element discretization (7) of the same.
We choose a circular velocity field c = (x2 , −x1 ), and take the top and bottom boundaries of the domain Ω = (−1, 1)2
as a Dirichlet boundary ΓD , whereas the left and right boundaries of Ω constitute a Neumann boundary ΓN . The
boundary values and forcing function are deduced from the exact solution, a superposition of Gaussian functions chosen
to create non-trivial features. The details of the exact solution are given in Appendix B. The problem is discretized
at polynomial order porder = 4 and makes use of element-local post processing, resulting in an observed optimal
convergence order of porder + 2 upon uniform mesh refinement (see [54]).
We train the RL policy for 3 · 105 training time steps, using a budget of 200 cells; all other training parameters are the
default values (§3.5). As in the other numerical experiments, the training budget was chosen to be significantly cheaper


                                                                   20
                               Deep Reinforcement Learning for Adaptive Mesh Refinement                                       A P REPRINT



              1                                                          1
                                                             23.0                                                      23.0




              0                                              11.4        0                                             11.4




                                                             -0.2                                                      -0.2
              1                                                          1
                  1                  0                   1                   1                0                    1

                      (a) Numerical solution, coarse mesh                          (b) AMR gradient heuristic
              1                                                          1
                                                             23.0                                                      23.0




              0                                              11.4        0                                             11.4




                                                             -0.2                                                      -0.2
              1                                                          1
                  1                  0                   1                   1                0                    1

                       (c) RL Agent (1500 cell budget)                           (d) RL Agent (5000 cell budget)
        Figure 15: Steady 2D advection diffusion. Numerical solution with overlaid mesh for the this problem in §4.6.



than the deployment budget. For comparison, we consider an AMR heuristic that makes use of the Kelly error indicator
with a bulk(50, 50) refinement strategy, refining and coarsening cells responsible for the top 50 percent and bottom 50
percent of the total estimated error, respectively. Both strategies are employed over 5 refinement cycles, beginning from
the coarse mesh shown in Fig. 15a.
The results of the comparison between the two algorithms are given in Figure 15. Examination of the L2 -error per
degree of freedom (not shown) again demonstrates that the RL agent is competitive with any of the AMR heuristics
considered in this paper. However, in this experiment, we focus on the relative ability of the heuristic and RL AMR
strategies to resolve relevant features of the solution, pursuant to the discussion in §1.1. We see from Figure 15a that on
the coarse starting mesh, the numerical solution is acutely under-resolved. Both the AMR heuristic (Figure 15b) and the
trained RL agent (Figures 15c, 15d) are able to satisfactorily resolve the features of the numerical solution, but the RL
agent does so with a more parsimonious allocation of elements over the mesh. Even when the computational budget is
increased from 1500 cells to 5000 cells, the RL agent makes only minor adjustments to the mesh.
The explanation for this is that the trained DRL-AMR model makes decisions based on the learned relationship
between the features of the observation space local to each element, and the change in the numerical solution upon
refinement. The HDG finite element schemes (7) enjoy a faster convergence rate and, typically, better overall accuracy
than the advection DG scheme (3.2) due to its dual formulation and element-wise post-processing, as discussed above.
Additionally, we use a relatively high-order (sixth-order effective convergence rate) finite element scheme as compared
to the smooth step example in §4.5, which exhibited second-order convergence. The RL policy is able to detect the fast
convergence to the exact solution (according to the local numerical solution as well as the jump discontinuities over the
boundary of each element) and elects to use only a small portion of its computational budget in order to resolve the


                                                                    21
                                          Deep Reinforcement Learning for Adaptive Mesh Refinement                                                                          A P REPRINT



solution, approximately 8 percent and 2 percent for budgets of 1500 cells and 5000 cells, respectively. We hypothesize
that the inclusion of additional HDG-specific features into the observation space, such as the numerical gradient qh or
the approximate numerical flux on the mesh skeleton ûh (7) could additionally improve performance.
In summary, the RL policy is able to judiciously allocate resources in order to capture non-trivial features of a numerical
solution. Furthermore, the generality of the RL methodology extends to more complicated finite element schemes and
is able to take advantage of their properties—in this case, high-order convergence due to a post-processed solution.

4.7        Unsteady 2D linear advection

Inspired by the novel advection-diffusion test cases in [45], we consider the two-dimensional, unsteady linear advection
problem described in §3.2 with the velocity field given by a reversible swirl flow
                                                                                             
                                       3                             3
                        c(x, y, t) =     a(t) sin2 (πx) sin(2πy), − a(t) sin2 (πy) sin(2πx)                         (11)
                                       2                             2
over the square domain Ω = (0, 1)2 . Here 0 ≤ t ≤ 1 and a(t) = 1 if t < 0.5 and a(t) = −1 if t ≥ 0.5, which reverses
the direction of the flow field at time t = 0.5. At the time T = 1, the analytical initial tracer distribution returns
to its initial location due to the flow symmetry and can be compared to the initial condition to measure the error in
the numerical solution. The boundary conditions and forcing function are taken to be zero over the duration of the
simulation.
The initial condition is given by
                                                                                          2 
                                                            1 p         2           2
                                                 u0 = exp − 2   (x − x0 ) + (y − y0 ) − r0      ,                                                                                        (12)
                                                           2σ
specifying a ring with inner radius r0 and approximate thickness 3σ centered at the point (x0 , y0 ). For this test case,
we choose the parameters r0 = 0.2, (x0 , y0 ) = (0.25, 0.25), and 3σ = 0.05, describing a thin ring centered in the
bottom right-hand corner of the domain, depicted in Figure 16a. The presence of steep gradients in the solution along
the inner and outer circumferences of the ring during both the forward and backward swirl advection process makes
this problem challenging, as well as a suitable test case to assess the ability of a numerical scheme to avoid spurious
diffusion and dispersion, and to preserve features of the analytical solution [45]. All numerical simulations are run at
polynomial order porder = 3 and make use of a small time step ∆t = 10−3 over the LSERK45 time integration so that
the overall error is determined by the error due to the spatial discretization.
  1.0                                            1.0                                             1.0                                           1.0
                                          1.1                                             1.1                                           1.1                                              0.1

  0.8                                            0.8                                             0.8                                           0.8


  0.6                                            0.6                                             0.6                                           0.6
                                          0.5                                             0.5                                           0.5                                              0.0
  0.4                                            0.4                                             0.4                                           0.4


  0.2                                            0.2                                             0.2                                           0.2

                                          -0.1                                            -0.1                                          -0.1                                             -0.1
  0.0                                            0.0                                             0.0                                           0.0
     0.0    0.2   0.4   0.6   0.8   1.0             0.0   0.2    0.4   0.6    0.8   1.0             0.0   0.2   0.4   0.6   0.8   1.0             0.0     0.2   0.4   0.6    0.8   1.0


                  (a) t = 0                                     (b) t = 0.5                                     (c) t = 1                               (d) uh − uexact , t = 1
                                                                                                                                    2
                              Figure 16: Unsteady 2D Ring advection. Numerical solution on a 64 uniform grid.

We train the reinforcement learning agent for 3 · 105 training time steps on a budget of 200 cells; all other training
parameters are the default values (§3.5). During deployment, we compare the trained DRL-AMR model to an AMR
heuristic which uses the Kelly error indicator with a conservative bulk(60, 40) refinement strategy. Both strategies
start on a coarse mesh of 4x4 elements and are allowed 6 refinement cycles during initialization, after which, they are
allowed one refinement cycle per time step for the duration of the simulation. In order to prevent the number of degrees
of freedom from growing unbounded over time integration for the AMR heuristic, we specify a maximum refinement
depth of 4, corresponding to the finest possible grid of 64x64 cells. To provide a fair comparison, the RL policy is
deployed with an equal maximum cell budget of 642 = 4096 elements.
The numerical solution which results from running the simulation on a uniform grid of 64x64 elements, corresponding
to the resolution limit for the AMR heuristic, is shown for comparison in Figure 16. The uniform grid simulation is
qualitatively able to well-preserve the features of the ring over the forward and reverse advection, at the final integration
time t = 1 (Figure 16c). This result serves as a baseline comparison for the AMR heuristic and the RL policy.


                                                                                             22
                                Deep Reinforcement Learning for Adaptive Mesh Refinement                                             A P REPRINT


  1.0                                             1.0                                             1.0
                                           1.1                                             1.1                                                0.1

  0.8                                             0.8                                             0.8


  0.6                                             0.6                                             0.6
                                           0.5                                             0.5                                                0.0
  0.4                                             0.4                                             0.4


  0.2                                             0.2                                             0.2

                                           -0.1                                            -0.1                                               -0.1
  0.0                                             0.0                                             0.0
     0.0   0.2   0.4     0.6   0.8   1.0             0.0   0.2   0.4    0.6    0.8   1.0             0.0   0.2   0.4    0.6    0.8      1.0

                 (a) t = 0.1                                     (b) t = 0.5                                (c) uh − uexact , t = 1
  1.0                                             1.0                                             1.0
                                           1.1                                             1.1                                                0.1

  0.8                                             0.8                                             0.8


  0.6                                             0.6                                             0.6
                                           0.5                                             0.5                                                0.0
  0.4                                             0.4                                             0.4


  0.2                                             0.2                                             0.2

                                           -0.1                                            -0.1                                               -0.1
  0.0                                             0.0                                             0.0
     0.0   0.2   0.4     0.6   0.8   1.0             0.0   0.2   0.4    0.6    0.8   1.0             0.0   0.2   0.4    0.6    0.8      1.0

                 (d) t = 0.1                                     (e) t = 0.5                                (f) uh − uexact , t = 1
                       Figure 17: Unsteady 2D Ring advection. AMR heuristic (top row) vs RL (bottom row).



The proposed meshes and resultant numerical solutions are shown for the AMR heuristic and the RL policy in Figure
17. As can be seen in panels 17a, 17b, 17d, and 17e, the qualitative features of the numerical solution resulting from
both approaches are very similar to that of the uniform grid simulation; that is, both approaches are able to successfully
resolve the features of the solution. Similar to the other experiments, the RL agent is able to achieve comparable
accuracy to the AMR heuristic, but with a comparatively coarser mesh, as is corroborated in Figures 17c and 17f; the
numerical errors for each approach are comparable and within 10 percent of the numerical error resulting from the
uniform mesh. However, in this particular test case, at each time step, the AMR heuristic used roughly a factor of 10
more elements than the RL policy.


4.8     Discussion of numerical experiments

The numerical experiments in §4.1-§4.2 demonstrated a proof of concept for the DRL-AMR approach; we were able to
train a model on a small budget, and apply it effectively to larger, different problems governed by the same PDE. Our
experiments indicated that random initialization led to a better exploration of the decision space and that all learning
algorithms considered were able to solve the problem. We saw that for a simplified observation space, the neural
network representing the trained RL policy was interpretable in terms of local solution conformity. The numerical
experiments in §4.3-§4.4 showed that the method generalizes to time-dependent problems, as well as to different PDEs
with mixed boundary conditions and significantly more complicated numerical schemes.
The test case in §4.5 demonstrated that the RL agent was able to learn a spatially heterogeneous, non-trivial strategy to
increase accuracy per cost by preferentially refining around a problem region on the boundary, a strategy on which
the AMR heuristic was not able to capitalize. The advection-diffusion problem in §4.6 extended the findings in
§4.4 to higher dimensions and exhibited the ability of the RL policy to take advantage of the fast convergence of a
post-processed solution as well as to resolve non-trivial features of a numerical solution cheaply. Lastly, the unsteady
2D advection problem in §4.7 displayed the ability of the trained RL policy to preserve similar non-trivial features over
the course of time integration in problems with dynamic, sharp gradients.


                                                                       23
                              Deep Reinforcement Learning for Adaptive Mesh Refinement                               A P REPRINT



Overall, our DRL-AMR methodology is flexible and effective at delivering efficient, high-quality solutions for both
static and time-dependent problems over a wide range of different PDEs, boundary conditions, dimensions, and problem
sizes.

5   Conclusions and future work
We introduced a novel deep reinforcement learning formulation for adaptive mesh refinement based on a partially
observable Markov decision process designed to balance numerical accuracy with computational cost, with the goal
of providing a learned, high-quality strategy for resolving solution features efficiently. The underlying idea is that
rather than hand-designing a heuristic error indicator a priori, the reinforcement learning agent will instead learn one
through trial and error during training by solving many inexpensive problems. This is advantageous because the learned
policy network can be arbitrarily complex and make use of any feature included in the observation space, including
information about computational cost. Furthermore, training the RL policy requires no domain-specific knowledge, as
the relevant information is encoded in the numerical solver, and, more abstractly, in the underlying PDE. Conversely,
specific features of a numerical scheme such as polynomial order and problem dimension are implicitly considered in
training through use of the numerical solver, as opposed to having to be analyzed and explicitly specified in the case of
a manually-defined error indicator.
Our implementation shows that the resultant trained policies are able to execute adaptive refinement strategies which
are competitive with, and in many cases, better than common AMR heuristics in terms of accuracy of the final solution
per problem degree of freedom. Our methodology is not specific to any particular PDE, spatial dimension, or numerical
scheme, and can flexibly incorporate physical or temporal history data into the observation space. The local nature of
the RL problems allows for training the RL agent on small problems and deploying the policy on much larger problems,
ensuring scalability. Lastly, at no point during training nor model deployment do we ever make use of an exact solution
or a “ground truth.”
Future work could incorporate p-refinement into the learning process to allow the RL agent access to a richer set of finite
element representations of the numerical solution, incorporate a more sophisticated belief distribution as to the regions
of under- or over-resolution in the numerical solution, or integrate transfer learning using existing error estimators
to accelerate training. Finally, the application of the new DRL-AMR schemes to the Navier–Stokes and geophysical
equations such as those used in storm surge [49, 63], ocean [29, 28, 65, 23, 24], and atmospheric [39] applications, as
well as studies of related numerical topics such as slope-limiting, preconditioning, and adaptive time integration, are the
subject of ongoing research.

Acknowledgements
We thank the members of the MSEAS group, especially Dr. C. Mirabito for review of the manuscript. We are grateful
to the Office of Naval Research (ONR) for partial research support under grants N00014-18-1-2781 (DRI-CALYPSO)
and N00014-20-1-2023 (MURI ML-SCOPE) to the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. We also thank the Spring
2022 course staff of 2.C51 for helpful discussions related to machine learning for physical systems. C. Foucart would
additionally like to thank the active deal.ii software development community for helpful discussion related to
cross-language software development.

References
 [1] M. Ainsworth and J. T. Oden. A posteriori error estimation in finite element analysis. Computer methods in applied mechanics
     and engineering, 142(1-2):1–88, 1997.
 [2] D. Arndt, W. Bangerth, B. Blais, M. Fehling, R. Gassmöller, T. Heister, L. Heltai, U. Köcher, M. Kronbichler, M. Maier, et al.
     The deal. ii library, version 9.3. Journal of Numerical Mathematics, 29(3):171–186, 2021.
 [3] D. Arndt, W. Bangerth, D. Davydov, T. Heister, L. Heltai, M. Kronbichler, M. Maier, J.-P. Pelteret, B. Turcksin, and D. Wells.
     The deal. ii finite element library: Design, features, and insights. Computers & Mathematics with Applications, 81:407–422,
     2021.
 [4] K. Arulkumaran, M. P. Deisenroth, M. Brundage, and A. A. Bharath. Deep reinforcement learning: A brief survey. IEEE
     Signal Processing Magazine, 34(6):26–38, 2017.
 [5] K. J. Åström. Optimal control of Markov processes with incomplete state information. Journal of mathematical analysis and
     applications, 10(1):174–205, 1965.
 [6] I. Babuska, J. Whiteman, and T. Strouboulis. Finite elements: an introduction to the method and error estimation. Oxford
     University Press, 2010.


                                                               24
                               Deep Reinforcement Learning for Adaptive Mesh Refinement                                A P REPRINT



 [7] W. Bangerth, C. Burstedde, T. Heister, and M. Kronbichler. Algorithms and data structures for massively parallel generic
     adaptive finite element codes. ACM Transactions on Mathematical Software (TOMS), 38(2):1–28, 2012.
 [8] P. Binev, W. Dahmen, and R. DeVore. Adaptive finite element methods with convergence rates. Numerische Mathematik,
     97(2):219–268, 2004.
 [9] C. M. Bishop and N. M. Nasrabadi. Pattern recognition and machine learning, volume 4. Springer, 2006.
[10] J. Bohn and M. Feischl. Recurrent neural networks as optimal mesh refinement strategies. Computers & Mathematics with
     Applications, 97:61–76, 2021.
[11] J. Bonilla and S. Badia. Monotonicity-preserving finite element schemes with adaptive mesh refinement for hyperbolic
     problems. Journal of Computational Physics, 416:109522, 2020.
[12] D. Braess, C. Carstensen, and R. H. Hoppe. Convergence analysis of a conforming adaptive finite element method for an
     obstacle problem. Numerische Mathematik, 107(3):455–471, 2007.
[13] S. C. Brenner, L. R. Scott, and L. R. Scott. The mathematical theory of finite element methods, volume 3. Springer, 2008.
[14] G. Brockman, V. Cheung, L. Pettersson, J. Schneider, J. Schulman, J. Tang, and W. Zaremba. OpenAI Gym. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:1606.01540, 2016.
[15] M. H. Carpenter and C. A. Kennedy. Fourth-order 2N-storage Runge-Kutta schemes. Technical report, NASA, 1994.
[16] B. Cockburn. Discontinuous Galerkin methods. ZAMM-Journal of Applied Mathematics and Mechanics/Zeitschrift für
     Angewandte Mathematik und Mechanik: Applied Mathematics and Mechanics, 83(11):731–754, 2003.
[17] P. Daniel, A. Ern, I. Smears, and M. Vohralík. An adaptive hp-refinement strategy with computable guaranteed bound on the
     error reduction factor. Computers & Mathematics with Applications, 76(5):967–983, 2018.
[18] H. De Sterck, T. Manteuffel, S. McCormick, J. Nolting, J. Ruge, and L. Tang. Efficiency-based h-and hp-refinement strategies
     for finite element methods. Numerical Linear Algebra with Applications, 15(2-3):89–114, 2008.
[19] A. Ern, A. F. Stephansen, and M. Vohralík. Guaranteed and robust discontinuous Galerkin a posteriori error estimates for
     convection–diffusion–reaction problems. Journal of computational and applied mathematics, 234(1):114–130, 2010.
[20] A.-m. Farahmand, S. Nabi, and D. N. Nikovski. Deep reinforcement learning for partial differential equation control. In 2017
     American Control Conference (ACC), pages 3120–3127. IEEE, 2017.
[21] N. Fehn, W. A. Wall, and M. Kronbichler. On the stability of projection methods for the incompressible navier–stokes equations
     based on high-order discontinuous galerkin discretizations. Journal of Computational Physics, 351:392–421, 2017.
[22] N. Fehn, W. A. Wall, and M. Kronbichler. Robust and efficient discontinuous galerkin methods for under-resolved turbulent
     incompressible flows. Journal of Computational Physics, 372:667–693, 2018.
[23] C. Foucart, C. Mirabito, P. J. Haley, Jr., and P. F. J. Lermusiaux. Distributed implementation and verification of hybridizable
     discontinuous Galerkin methods for nonhydrostatic ocean processes. In OCEANS Conference 2018, Charleston, SC, Oct. 2018.
     IEEE.
[24] C. Foucart, C. Mirabito, P. J. Haley, Jr., and P. F. J. Lermusiaux. High-order discontinuous Galerkin methods for nonhydrostatic
     ocean processes with a free surface. In OCEANS 2021 IEEE/MTS, pages 1–9. IEEE, Sept. 2021.
[25] S. Fujimoto, H. van Hoof, and D. Meger. Addressing function approximation error in actor-critic methods. In J. Dy and
     A. Krause, editors, Proceedings of the 35th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 80 of Proceedings of
     Machine Learning Research, pages 1587–1596. PMLR, 10–15 Jul 2018.
[26] G. Gassner, C. Altmann, F. Hindenlang, M. Staudenmeier, and C. Munz. Explicit discontinuous Galerkin schemes with
     adaptation in space and time. 36th CFD/ADIGMA course on hp-adaptive and hp-multigrid methods, VKI LS, 2009.
[27] T. Haarnoja, A. Zhou, P. Abbeel, and S. Levine. Soft actor-critic: Off-policy maximum entropy deep reinforcement learning
     with a stochastic actor. CoRR, abs/1801.01290, 2018.
[28] P. J. Haley, Jr., A. Agarwal, and P. F. J. Lermusiaux. Optimizing velocities and transports for complex coastal regions and
     archipelagos. Ocean Modeling, 89:1–28, 2015.
[29] P. J. Haley, Jr. and P. F. J. Lermusiaux. Multiscale two-way embedding schemes for free-surface primitive equations in the
     “Multidisciplinary Simulation, Estimation and Assimilation System”. Ocean Dynamics, 60(6):1497–1537, Dec. 2010.
[30] C. F. Hayes, R. Rădulescu, E. Bargiacchi, J. Källström, M. Macfarlane, M. Reymond, T. Verstraeten, L. M. Zintgraf, R. Dazeley,
     F. Heintz, et al. A practical guide to multi-objective reinforcement learning and planning. Autonomous Agents and Multi-Agent
     Systems, 36(1):1–59, 2022.
[31] J. S. Hesthaven and T. Warburton. Nodal discontinuous Galerkin methods: algorithms, analysis, and applications. Springer
     Science & Business Media, 2007.
[32] R. H. Hoppe, Y. Iliash, C. Iyyunni, and N. H. Sweilam. A posteriori error estimates for adaptive finite element discretizations
     of boundary control problems. -, 2006.
[33] R. H. Hoppe, G. Kanschat, and T. Warburton. Convergence analysis of an adaptive interior penalty discontinuous galerkin
     method. SIAM journal on numerical analysis, 47(1):534–550, 2009.


                                                                 25
                               Deep Reinforcement Learning for Adaptive Mesh Refinement                                A P REPRINT



[34] K. Hornik, M. Stinchcombe, and H. White. Multilayer feedforward networks are universal approximators. Neural networks,
     2(5):359–366, 1989.
[35] A. Joshi, A. B. Thompson, E. M. Sevick-Muraca, and W. Bangerth. Adaptive finite element methods for forward modeling in
     fluorescence enhanced frequency domain optical tomography. In Biomedical Topical Meeting, page WB7. Optical Society of
     America, 2004.
[36] E. Kaiser, J. N. Kutz, and S. L. Brunton. Sparse identification of nonlinear dynamics for model predictive control in the
     low-data limit. Proceedings of the Royal Society A, 474(2219):20180335, 2018.
[37] D. W. Kelly, J. De SR Gago, O. C. Zienkiewicz, and I. Babuska. A posteriori error analysis and adaptive processes in the finite
     element method: Part i—error analysis. International journal for numerical methods in engineering, 19(11):1593–1619, 1983.
[38] R. I. Klein. Star formation with 3-d adaptive mesh refinement: the collapse and fragmentation of molecular clouds. Journal of
     Computational and Applied Mathematics, 109(1-2):123–152, 1999.
[39] M. A. Kopera and F. X. Giraldo. Analysis of adaptive mesh refinement for imex discontinuous galerkin solutions of the
     compressible euler equations with application to atmospheric simulations. Journal of Computational Physics, 275:92–117,
     2014.
[40] A. Krishnapriyan, A. Gholami, S. Zhe, R. Kirby, and M. W. Mahoney. Characterizing possible failure modes in physics-informed
     neural networks. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34, 2021.
[41] L. Krivodonova and J. E. Flaherty. Error estimation for discontinuous galerkin solutions of two-dimensional hyperbolic
     problems. Advances in Computational Mathematics, 19(1):57–71, 2003.
[42] L. Krivodonova, J. Xin, J.-F. Remacle, N. Chevaugeon, and J. E. Flaherty. Shock detection and limiting with discontinuous
     galerkin methods for hyperbolic conservation laws. Applied Numerical Mathematics, 48(3-4):323–338, 2004.
[43] M. Kronbichler. The Discontinuous Galerkin Method: Derivation and Properties. In M. Kronbichler and P.-O. Persson, editors,
     Efficient High-Order Discretizations for Computational Fluid Dynamics, pages 1–55. Springer International Publishing, 2021.
[44] C. S. Kulkarni, A. Gupta, and P. F. J. Lermusiaux. Sparse regression and adaptive feature generation for the discovery of
     dynamical systems. In F. Darema, E. Blasch, S. Ravela, and A. Aved, editors, Dynamic Data Driven Application Systems.
     DDDAS 2020., volume 12312 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 208–216. Springer, Cham, Nov. 2020.
[45] C. S. Kulkarni and P. F. J. Lermusiaux. Advection without compounding errors through flow map composition. Journal of
     Computational Physics, 398:108859, Dec. 2019.
[46] P. F. J. Lermusiaux. Numerical fluid mechanics. MIT OpenCourseWare, May 2015.
[47] Y. Li. Deep reinforcement learning: An overview. arXiv preprint arXiv:1701.07274, 2017.
[48] T. P. Lillicrap, J. J. Hunt, A. Pritzel, N. Heess, T. Erez, Y. Tassa, D. Silver, and D. Wierstra. Continuous control with deep
     reinforcement learning, 2015.
[49] K. T. Mandli and C. N. Dawson. Adaptive mesh refinement for storm surge. Ocean Modelling, 75:36–50, 2014.
[50] V. Mnih, A. P. Badia, M. Mirza, A. Graves, T. P. Lillicrap, T. Harley, D. Silver, and K. Kavukcuoglu. Asynchronous methods
     for deep reinforcement learning. arXiv, 2016.
[51] V. Mnih, K. Kavukcuoglu, D. Silver, A. Graves, I. Antonoglou, D. Wierstra, and M. Riedmiller. Playing atari with deep
     reinforcement learning, 2013.
[52] P. Morin, R. H. Nochetto, and K. G. Siebert. Data oscillation and convergence of adaptive fem. SIAM Journal on Numerical
     Analysis, 38(2):466–488, 2000.
[53] F. Naddei, M. de la Llave Plata, V. Couaillier, and F. Coquel. A comparison of refinement indicators for p-adaptive simulations
     of steady and unsteady flows using discontinuous galerkin methods. Journal of Computational Physics, 376:508–533, 2019.
[54] N. C. Nguyen, J. Peraire, and B. Cockburn. An implicit high-order hybridizable discontinuous galerkin method for linear
     convection–diffusion equations. Journal of Computational Physics, 228(9):3232–3254, 2009.
[55] J. Pan, J. Huang, G. Cheng, and Y. Zeng. Reinforcement learning for automatic quadrilateral mesh generation: a soft actor-critic
     approach. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.11203, 2022.
[56] T. Plewa, T. Linde, V. G. Weirs, et al. Adaptive mesh refinement-theory and applications. Springer, 2005.
[57] A. Raffin, A. Hill, M. Ernestus, A. Gleave, A. Kanervisto, and N. Dormann. Stable Baselines3, 2019.
[58] J. Schulman, F. Wolski, P. Dhariwal, A. Radford, and O. Klimov. Proximal policy optimization algorithms, 2017.
[59] D. Silver. Lectures on reinforcement learning. URL : https://www.davidsilver.uk/teaching/, 2015.
[60] S. Sonoda and N. Murata. Neural network with unbounded activation functions is universal approximator. Applied and
     Computational Harmonic Analysis, 43(2):233–268, 2017.
[61] W. A. Strauss. Partial differential equations: An introduction. John Wiley & Sons, 2007.
[62] R. S. Sutton and A. G. Barto. Reinforcement learning: An introduction. MIT press, 2018.
[63] A. Thomas, J. Dietrich, M. Loveland, A. Samii, and C. Dawson. Improving coastal flooding predictions by switching meshes
     during a simulation. Ocean Modelling, 164:101820, 2021.


                                                                 26
                               Deep Reinforcement Learning for Adaptive Mesh Refinement                                 A P REPRINT



[64] M. P. Ueckermann and P. F. J. Lermusiaux. High order schemes for 2D unsteady biogeochemical ocean models. Ocean
     Dynamics, 60(6):1415–1445, Dec. 2010.
[65] M. P. Ueckermann and P. F. J. Lermusiaux. Hybridizable discontinuous Galerkin projection methods for Navier–Stokes and
     Boussinesq equations. Journal of Computational Physics, 306:390–421, 2016.
[66] A. Vidal-Ferràndiz, A. Carreño, D. Ginestar Peiro, and G. J. Verdú Martín. hp-finite element method for the simplified pn
     equations. In Congreso de Métodos Numéricos en Ingeniería (CMN 2017). Actas, pages 208–220. International Center for
     Numerical Methods in Engineering (CIMNE), 2017.
[67] Y. Wang, Z. Shen, Z. Long, and B. Dong. Learning to discretize: solving 1d scalar conservation laws via deep reinforcement
     learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.11079, 2019.
[68] S. Wei, X. Jin, and H. Li. General solutions for nonlinear differential equations: a rule-based self-learning approach using deep
     reinforcement learning. Computational Mechanics, 64(5):1361–1374, 2019.
[69] J. Yang, T. Dzanic, B. Petersen, J. Kudo, K. Mittal, V. Tomov, J.-S. Camier, T. Zhao, H. Zha, T. Kolev, et al. Reinforcement
     learning for adaptive mesh refinement. arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.01342, 2021.
[70] T. D. Young and R. Armiento. Strategies for h-adaptive refinement for a finite element treatment of harmonic oscillator
     schrödinger eigenproblem. Communications in Theoretical Physics, 53(6):1017, 2010.


Appendix A. Tunable policies

Computational resources are user- and time-dependent. For different applications, or even in the middle of a simulation,
we may seek to adjust how aggressive our reinforcement learning agent is in refining or coarsening our mesh. We
directly encode the trade-off between accuracy and computational cost in hyperparameter γc , which the user may tune
freely. However, naively changing γc would require re-training our reinforcement learning agent. Next, we show how
we can avoid re-training while simultaneously allowing for policy tuning.
The more general setting to this problem is multi-objective reinforcement learning (MORL). We seek an agent that
is optimized over a continuum of objective functions depending upon γc . The value function Vtπ (st ) is the expected
reward following policy π given state st . Traditionally, Vtπ : S → R maps an observation to a scalar, but in MORL, the
value function Vtπ : S → Rd maps an observation to a d-dimensional vector indexed by the different objective functions.
In our case, the value function Vtπ (st ; γc ) : S → Cb (R) maps an observation to a bounded continuous function. Most
approaches in the MORL literature attempt to find either a single policy by scalarizing the vector-valued Vtπ or multiple
policies by repeatedly training over different objective functions (see [30] for a literature review). However, due to
a particular feature of our expected reward function Qt , we are able to simply learn over a continuum of objective
functions.
Consider an expected reward function Qt : O × A → R that can be split into two parts: a function that can be explicitly
computed given the observation, i.e. the “known” function Q(k) , and a function that needs to be learned, Q(l) .
                                                              (k)                (l)
                                           Qt (s, a; γc ) = Qt (s, a; γc ) + Qt (s, a)                                           (13)

There is no reason to learn Q(k) if it can be explicitly computed; instead, we should just represent Q(l) with a deep
neural network as in deep Q-learning. Then, the outputs of the two Q functions can be combined at the end, and the
argmax of the resulting sum will be the action that we take. Importantly, the hyperparameter γc is only an argument of
the known function that we can explicitly compute. This allows us to learn one function Ql but then change our policy
adaptively as a function γc . Computationally, we really learn the function Q̂t : S → R|A| that maps an observation to
the expected reward for every action in the action space, and we denote this modified and approximate expected reward
function with a hat. In figure 18, we delineate a traditional deep Q-learning policy π from a tunable policy π̃.
In our particular case, the reward function (1) is naturally decomposed into a part that needs to be learned and one
that can be explicitly computed: the accuracy needs to be learned but the computational cost and barrier function are
explicitly known. Call these partial rewards R(l) and R(k) , respectively. We can write our Q function as follows.
                                         " ∞                  ∞
                                                                                           #
                                                i (k)             i (l)
                                           X                 X
                           Qt (s, a) = E      γk Rt+i+1 +        γ Rt+i+1 St = s, At = a                           (14)
                                                i=0                 i=0


Above, we have used different discount factors γk and γ for R(k) and R(l) , respectively. We consider the case where
γk = 0. In our example, setting the discount factor on the computational cost to zero is justified in that we are usually
only concerned with the computational cost at a given instant. Furthermore, the computational load on a machine is


                                                                 27
                               Deep Reinforcement Learning for Adaptive Mesh Refinement                                  A P REPRINT




                                                   argmax                                                       argmax




Figure 18: We depict a vanilla policy based on Deep Q-Learning and a tunable policy. The tunable policy splits the Q̂ function into
known and learned functions. The learned function is represented by a neural network, while the known policy can be evaluated
explicitly given the observations. In the tunable policy, the hyperparameter γc is an input to the known Q̂(k) function which does not
have to be re-learned.


often highly unpredictable; for example, other users may submit jobs in the middle of our simulation. As such, a greedy
approach to discounting the computational penalty is desirable, and we may rewrite our expected reward as follows.
                                                                " ∞                               #
                                   h                      i
                                     (k)                                i (l)
                                                                  X
                    Qt (s, a) = E Rt+1 St = s, At = a + E             γ Rt+i+1 St = s, At = a                      (15)
                                 |           {z           }       i=0
                                              (k)            |                 {z                 }
                                                 Qt                                        (l)
                                                                                         Qt


With that, we have defined our known and learned Q functions, and to train we simply omit R(k) from our reward
entirely by setting γc = 0. Once trained, we append Q(k) to the end of our Q(k) network in order to make predictions,
and γc may be set arbitrarily without retraining. We note that separable rewards are not limited to this case where we
balance computational cost and simulation accuracy, and we posit that there are many other areas where this framework
may be beneficial.
While we have described how to perform MORL in instances where Q is separable and the action space is discrete, this
framework should be extendable to the continuous case. In actor-critic policies where the critic learns the Q function
(e.g. deep deterministic policy gradient (DDPG) [48], twin delayed DDPG (TD3) [25], and soft actor critic (SAC) [27]
methods), one should be able to apply a similar methodology: after learning Q(l) , one should be able to append Q(k) .
In the continuous case, however, the actor must be re-trained since we cannot just take the argmax of a continuous
action space. Fortunately, re-training the actor should be computationally inexpensive since the policy networks tend
to be small, and we can just randomly sample from the action space. That is, we do not need to re-sample from our
environment; instead, because we already know our Q function, we simply need to re-train the actor to maximize the
estimated reward given an action from our action space. This procedure is the subject of ongoing research.

Appendix B. Exact solution, §4.6
The exact solution is given by
                                                      25                      
                                                      X1         1           2
                                          u(x) =           exp − 2 kx − xi k
                                                 i=1
                                                     2πσ 2      σ
with parameter σ = 1/10 and source centers xi described in Table 2.

       i   xi = (x1 , x2 /α)
       1    (-0.75, -0.25)       6     (-0.25, -0.25)       11   (0.125, -0.75)   16   (-0.75, -0.625)   21   (-0.25, -0.375)
       2    (-0.75, -0.75)       7     (-0.25, -0.50)       12    (0.5, -0.75)    17   (-0.50, -0.625)   22   (0.125, -0.625)
       3    (-0.75, -0.50)       8     (-0.25, -0.75)       13     (0.5, -0.5 )   18   (-0.25, -0.625)   23    (0.5 , -0.625)
       4    (-0.50, -0.25)       9     (0.125, -0.25)       14    (0.5 , -0.25)   19   (-0.75, -0.375)   24    (0.625 ,-0.25)
       5    (-0.50, -0.50)       10    (0.125, -0.50)       15   (0.75 , -0.25)   20   (-0.50, -0.375)   25   (0.125, -0.375)

                                      Table 2: Description of source centers, where α = 1.1.



                                                                   28
                             Deep Reinforcement Learning for Adaptive Mesh Refinement                          A P REPRINT



Appendix C. Additional training parameters
For all numerical experiments, we used a time discount factor γ = 0.99, which is the default for the Stable-Baselines-3
library. The large negative reward accrued by the agent upon running out of computational resources was taken to be
Rexceed = −1 · 103 ; this was important as a learning signal in the cases where the RL agent was trained on a small
computational budget, as the barrier function B(p) in (1) is undefined outside p = 1. Training episodes were terminated
after finite number of iterations, we used 200; this choice is arbitrary, as long as the number of iterations is large enough
that it is possible for the agent to approach its computational budget and receive the large negative reward for doing so.
At the time of this writing, the authors have made no attempt to accelerate the training process through optimization of
training parameters such as batch size and episode length, but point out that doing so constitutes the subject of ongoing
research.




                                                            29
