                                                                Dielectric continuum methods for quantum chemistry




arXiv:2203.06846v1 [physics.chem-ph] 14 Mar 2022
                                                                                       John M. Herbert∗
                                                    Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio, USA

                                                                                                 March 15, 2022



                                                                                                     Abstract
                                                           This review describes the theory and implementation of implicit solvation models based on
                                                           continuum electrostatics. Within quantum chemistry this formalism is sometimes synonymous
                                                           with the polarizable continuum model, a particular boundary-element approach to the problem
                                                           defined by the Poisson or Poisson-Boltzmann equation, but that moniker belies the diversity
                                                           of available methods. This work reviews the current state-of-the art, with emphasis on theory
                                                           and methods rather than applications. The basics of continuum electrostatics are described,
                                                           including the nonequilibrium polarization response upon excitation or ionization of the solute.
                                                           Nonelectrostatic interactions, which must be included in the model in order to obtain accurate
                                                           solvation energies, are described as well. Numerical techniques for implementing the equations
                                                           are discussed, including linear-scaling algorithms that can be used in classical or mixed quan-
                                                           tum/classical biomolecular electrostatics calculations. Anisotropic models that can describe
                                                           interfacial solvation are briefly described.


                                                   Contents

                                                   1 Overview                                                                                                 2

                                                   2 Continuum Electrostatics                                                                          4
                                                     2.1 Poisson’s equation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
                                                     2.2 Solute cavity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
                                                     2.3 Polarizable continuum models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
                                                     2.4 Comparison of ASC-PCMs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15

                                                   3 Implementation                                                                                          16
                                                     3.1 Matrix equations for PCMs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           16
                                                     3.2 Discretization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      19
                                                     3.3 Isodensity and self-consistent cavity surfaces . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        22
                                                     3.4 Linear-scaling algorithms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         24

                                                   4 Solvation Energies                                                                               26
                                                     4.1 SMx and SASA-based models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
                                                     4.2 Physics-based models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
                                                     ∗
                                                         herbert@chemistry.ohio-state.edu




                                                                                                         1
5 Nonequilibrium Solvation                                                                            36
  5.1 Conceptual overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     36
  5.2 State-specific approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   38
  5.3 Linear response approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      47

6 Anisotropic Solvation                                                                               48

7 Closing remarks                                                                                     50

References                                                                                            51


1    Overview
The use of dielectric continuum models in quantum chemistry dates to the mid-1970s, 1–6 to when
the field itself was still in its infancy. In their simplest form, these models describe the solvent in
terms of a single parameter εs , the (static) dielectric constant, a dimensionless quantity equal to the
electric permittivity relative to vacuum and ranging (for simple liquids) from εs ≈ 2 for non-polar
solvents such as benzene and hexane, up to εs = 78 for water and εs = 110 for formamide. This
constant describes the solvent’s ability to screen a charge, and the Coulomb interaction between
charges Q1 and Q2 separated by a distance r is modified from V (r) = Q1 Q2 /4πε0 r in the gas phase,
to an attenuated version V (r) = Q1 Q2 /4πε0 εs r within the dielectric medium. The continuum de-
scription represents the ultimate in coarse-graining, reducing the solvent to a single parameter,
which has obvious utility in a quantum chemistry calculation whose cost rises steeply with system
size. Within a continuum description, there is no need for sampling over solvent degrees of freedom
(e.g., solvent reorganization in response to an electron transfer event that modifies the solute’s
charge distribution), because this averaging is implicitly encoded into the value of εs . While advan-
tageous from the standpoint of cost, limitations of the continuum description are equally apparent:
“specific” solvation effects such as hydrogen bonding are not captured, and dielectric continuum
theory alone does not describe nonelectrostatic interactions including dispersion and Pauli repul-
sion. Without the latter, there is nothing to imbue the molecules with finite size, necessitating ad
hoc introduction of a “solute cavity” to define the interface between the atomistic solute and the
continuum solvent, as depicted in Fig. 1.
    Some of the aforementioned limitations can be overcome, in principle, by admission of a small
number of explicit solvent molecules into the atomistic part of the calculation, in what is often called
a “semicontinuum” or a “cluster + continuum” approach. 8 As such, the continuum description
serves as a flexible and highly useful starting point for the description of solvation effects in quantum
chemistry. Introduction of continuum solvation models into quantum chemistry was led by the
group of Tomasi in Pisa, 9–16 who refer to this approach as the polarizable continuum models (PCM).
That terminology will be introduced in Section 2.3, to refer to a particular class of continuum
solvation models that replace the three-dimensional partial differential equations of continuum
electrostatics with a two-dimensional boundary element problem, defined on the surface of a cavity
representing the interface between atomistic solute and continuum solvent. Although PCMs are
ubiquitous in quantum chemistry, they are not the only continuum solvation models that are used
in the field and not the only ones discussed herein. In any case, the combination of a quantum-
mechanical (QM) description of the solute sets up a self-consistent reaction-field (SCRF) problem
in which the solute’s charge distribution both polarizes, and is polarized by, its environment. The
two effects must be iterated to self-consistency.



                                                   2
                                                                                     ΓvdW
                   (a)                            (b)      ΓSAS                                                              –
                                                                                                            –
                                                                                                             +           –
                                                                                                                     +           –
                                                                                                –
                                                                                            +
                                                                                                    +                        –
                                                                                                                     +
                                                                                                                         + –         –
                                                                           +
                                                                               –                                         + –         –

                                                               +
                                                                       +
                                                                           –
                                                                                     εin                                 +
                                                                                                                             –

                                                               +
                                                                       + –          ∍
                                                                                   (r Ω)                         +



                                                                        + – –
                                                                   +
                                                                           +                            –
                                                                                     + – – – –
                                                                                                            +
                                                                           +
                                                                                               +
                                                          εout                     +    + +      +
                                                                                        +           +
                                                           ∍
                                                         (r Ω)


Fig. 1: (a) Zwitterionic tautomer of glycine (− O2 CCH2 NH+     3 ) in a molecular cavity constructed
from atom-centered spheres. Coloring reflects the sign and magnitude of the molecular electrostatic
potential evaluated at the cavity surface, ϕρ (s) for s ∈ Γ. (b) Schematic illustration of the same
molecular cavity (in green) embedded in a dielectric medium (in blue), illustrating how the contin-
uum polarizes in response to the solute’s electrostatic potential. The orange probe sphere illustrates
how the atomic radii that define the van der Waals (vdW) cavity surface might be augmented to
afford a “solvent-accessible surface” (SAS). The region interior to the solute cavity is designated
as Ω, and for a sharp dielectric interface one sets ε(r) ≡ εin for r ∈ Ω. If the solute is described
using quantum chemistry then the natural choice is εin = 1. Outside of the cavity, the permittivity
function ε(r) takes the value εout , which is usually the static dielectric constant of the solvent, εs .
Panel (b) is adapted from Ref. 7; copyright 2008 John Wiley & Sons.


    The remainder of this review is organized as follows. Section 2 provides the elementary specifi-
cation of the continuum electrostatics problem, starting from the Poisson and Poisson-Boltzmann
equations. The mechanics of turning that formalism into a computationally-tractable model are
discussed in Section 3, with an emphasis on the smooth discretization approach developed by this
author’s group. 17–21 The focus here is on continuum solvation models in quantum chemistry but the
formalism in Sections 2 and 3 is perfectly applicable to biomolecular implicit solvent calculations,
in which a macromolecular solute is described using a classical force field. 19 Section 3 also intro-
duces the various flavors of PCM that can be found in the literature and discusses how they can
be understood in one another’s context. It should be noted that the solution of Poisson’s equation,
or equivalently the apparent surface charge PCM problem, specifies only the electrostatic contribu-
tion to the solvation energy. Other contributions including cavitation, dispersion, Pauli repulsion,
and hydrogen bonding must be included in order to predict free energies of solvation (∆solv G) in
reasonable agreement with experiment. Section 4 introduces models for these nonelectrostatic con-
tributions and provides an overview of the accuracy that can be expected for ∆solv G. Section 5
introduces several “nonequilibrium” formulations of the continuum electrostatics problem, which
are used to describe the continuum’s response to a sudden change in the solute’s charge density,
as in photoexcitation or photoionization. This provides the machinery to compute solvent effects
on vertical excitation, ionization, or fluorescence energies. Finally, Section 6 discusses modifica-
tions to the isotropic continuum model that are necessary in order to describe anisotropic solvation
environments, such as the air/water interface or the solid-state/aqueous interface.
    This review is focused on the theoretical framework and computational mechanics of continuum
solvation models, not on applications. While some limited data to describe the performance of the
models are provided, for a complete overview of continuum solvation methods in action, the reader is
directed to several general reviews, 8,13–15,22–24 as well as specialized ones concerning the application
of PCMs to specific types of spectroscopy. 25–31 In lieu of a great deal of data, the present work

                                                   3
provides copious references to the primary literature.


2     Continuum Electrostatics
This section reviews the basic electrostatic formalism that underlies continuum solvation theory.
The physical model is defined by Poisson’s equation in three-dimensional space (Section 2.1) but is
not fully specified without a surface to demarcate the boundary of the atomistic region (Section 2.2).
The polarizable continuum models that were introduced into quantum chemistry by Tomasi and co-
workers 6,9,13 are introduced in Section 2.3, and stem from a reformulation of the Poisson problem
as a boundary-element of “apparent surface charge” problem. There are several variants, and these
are compared side-by-side in Section 2.4.

2.1   Poisson’s equation
The basic tenet of dielectric continuum theory is an assumption that the electric response of matter
can be coarse-grained in the form of a dipole density P that defines the polarization of the medium.
In the presence of this dielectric medium, the role of the electric field E(r) in vacuum is supplanted
by the electric displacement field (or electric induction),

                                 D(r) = E(r) + 4πP(r) = ε(r) E(r) .                               (2.1)

The electric permittivity ε(r) is defined by the manner in which polarization P(r) is induced by
the external field E(r), and Eq. (2.1) amounts to the definition of a linear dielectric material whose
polarization is proportional to field strength. Nonlinear susceptibilities are harder to describe within
a continuum formalism and have received less attention. 13 Whereas a fully general discussion of
(linear) dielectric materials would allow for a permittivity that is a function of frequency also (or
even a nonlocal function of space and/or time, in some formulations), 32–34 the ground-state SCRF
problem does not require this generality, and unless otherwise specified, ε will mean the static (zero-
frequency) dielectric constant, εs . (The continuum electrostatics community has stubbornly defied
the suggestion 35 that “dielectric constant” is obsolete and should be replaced by “relative electric
permittivity”.) For an anisotropic medium, ε would take the form of a 3 × 3 tensor rather than
scalar, which could be used to model a liquid crystal in which the electric susceptibility depends
on the orientation of the applied field. 36,37 This review will not consider such cases, although a
different form of anisotropic solvation is considered in Section 6. Herein, ε is a scalar.
    That said, Eq. (2.1) does express the permittivity as a scalar-valued function, ε(r), rather than
simply a dielectric constant. This allows for a situation such as that depicted in Fig. 1(b), wherein
a “solute cavity” (two-dimensional surface Γ) defines an interface between the continuum solvent
and an atomistic region, the latter of which shall be described using quantum chemistry. Within
the cavity, inter-particle Coulomb interactions are included explicitly in the Hamiltonian and thus
ε = 1 in this region. Outside of the cavity, the permittivity function takes on a value equal to the
(static) dielectric constant of the solvent, e.g., ε = 78 for water. Given a charge density ρ(r) for
the solute, including both nuclei and electrons, Maxwell’s equation for the displacement field D(r)
is
                                           ˆ · D(r) = 4πρ(r) .
                                           ∇                                                       (2.2)
                                                 ˆ
Recognizing that the electric field is E(r) = −∇ϕ(r),    where ϕ(r) is the electrostatic potential,
Eq. (2.2) can be written in the more familiar form of Poisson’s equation,
                                       h          i
                                   ˆ · ε(r) ∇ϕ(r)
                                   ∇        ˆ       = −4πρ(r) .                              (2.3)

                                                   4
All of these equations are expressed in Gaussian electrostatic units, where 4πε0 = 1. 38
    Poisson’s equation is the mathematical starting point for continuum electrostatics. Given the
charge density ρ(r) from an electronic structure calculation, Eq. (2.3) is solved for ϕ(r) throughout
space, including both the atomistic region and the surrounding dielectric medium. This potential
can be separated into two parts,
                                      ϕ(r) = ϕρ (r) + ϕrxn (r) ,                                 (2.4)
where the first term is the electrostatic potential generated by the solute’s charge density,
                                               Z
                                        ρ           ρ(r′ )
                                       ϕ (r) =              dr′ ,                                  (2.5)
                                                  kr − r′ k

whereas the “reaction field” contribution ϕrxn (r) arises from polarization of the continuum, resulting
in an additional charge density ρpol (r). Having obtained ρ(r) from Schrödinger’s equation and then
ϕ(r) by solving Eq. (2.3), the electrostatic solvation energy can be expressed variously as 18,39
                                  Z                        Z
                                1                        1
                        Gelst =       ϕrxn (r) ρ(r) dr =      ϕρ (r) ρpol (r) dr .                (2.6)
                                2                        2

This is sometimes alternatively called the polarization energy (Gpol ), 18 but we will use the term
electrostatic energy (Gelst ) as that is the nomenclature typically encountered in the literature on
dielectric materials. 38 Unlike the theory of intermolecular interactions, 40 it makes little sense in
the present context to consider electrostatics separate from polarization but the reader may, if
desired, substitute the phrase “electrostatics + polarization” whenever “electrostatics” is used
herein. The quantity Gelst is a free energy insofar as the dielectric formalism implicitly accounts for
the averaging over solvent degrees of freedom, and the factor of 1/2 in Eq. (2.6) reflects the fact
that the interaction energy is reduced, by precisely half its value, on account of the work required
to polarize the environment. 9,18,41,42
    From the point of view of electronic structure theory, Gelst [ε, ρ] is a functional of both the
permittivity function ε(r) and the solute’s charge density ρ(r). The total (free) energy is

                                  G0 [Ψ] = Ψ Ĥvac Ψ + Gelst [ε, ρ] ,                              (2.7)

where the first term represents the electronic energy in vacuo. (It is written here in a form that
suggests wave function quantum mechanics but could be replaced by a density functional.) This
can equivalently be expressed as a total energy functional

                                     G0 [Ψ] = Ψ Ĥvac + 12 R̂0 Ψ                                   (2.8)

where R̂0 is a reaction-field operator that generates the integral in Eq. (2.6). Minimization of G0 [Ψ],
or G0 [ρ] in density functional theory (DFT), in conjunction with Poisson’s equation to obtain the
electrostatic potential that defines R̂0 , defines the SCRF problem. Provided that the electronic
structure model satisfies a variational principle, as it does for self-consistent field (SCF) models,
then the total energy defined by Eq. (2.7) satisfies a variational principle as well, 18,43
    Equation (2.3) is sometimes called the “generalized” form of Poisson’s equation, with the “or-
dinary” form being
                                         ε∇ˆ 2 ϕ(r) = −4πρ(r) .                                   (2.9)
The distinction is that the permittivity function ε(r) in Eq. (2.3) is replaced in Eq. (2.9) by a scalar,
ε. It is the latter equation that is often taken to define the continuum electrostatics problem, but
this requires additional specification because ε = 1 for the atomistic interactions. Some sort of

                                                   5
molecular surface is needed to delineate the boundary with the continuum, as shown in Fig. 1
where the cavity is defined by a union of atom-centered spheres. Given a cavity surface, Eq. (2.9)
is shorthand for Eq. (2.3) with the permittivity function
                                             (
                                               εin , r ∈ Ω
                                      ε(r) =               .                               (2.10)
                                               εout , r ∈
                                                        /Ω

Note that ϕ(r) is continuous across the cavity surface but its derivative is not. 9 In general it makes
sense to take εin = 1 although larger values (commonly εin = 2–4, 7,44,45 but in some cases εin =
10–20 45–48 ) have sometimes been used in biomolecular electrostatics calculations, in an effort to
approximate a “dielectric constant of protein”. (However, the very concept that such a “constant”
exists has been vociferously criticized. 44,49–52 ) If the solute is described using quantum mechanics,
however, then any choice other than εin = 1 represents an inconsistent treatment of the Coulomb
interactions unless the Coulomb operators that define Ĥvac are modified, which is seldom done.
    Although we have introduced it as a quantum-mechanical SCRF problem that must be solved
in tandem with the electronic structure problem, Eq. (2.3) is also used in classical electrostatics
calculations for biomolecules, 53–56 where ρ(r) is comprised of classical point charges (or higher-order
multipoles 57,58 ) that come from a force field, e.g.,
                                                   atoms
                                                    X
                                       ρ(r) =              QA δ(r − RA ) .                           (2.11)
                                                      A

For biomolecular applications, one is often interested in an aqueous solvent containing some con-
centration of dissolved ions. The continuum analogue of that situation is described by the Poisson-
Boltzmann equation, 7,59–62
                                 h           i                     
                              ˆ · ε(r) ˆ
                              ∇        ∇ϕ(r) = −4π ρ(r) + ρions (r) ,                        (2.12)

in which the right side of Eq. (2.3) has been augmented with a term that accounts for a thermal
distribution of dissolved ions. 7,60 Whereas the solute’s charge density ρ(r) reflects atomistic model-
ing, using either a classical force field or else an electronic structure calculation, the density ρions (r)
of “mobile” ions is treated statistically. 60,63 For an electrolyte with dissolved ion concentrations
{ci }, whose ionic charges are denoted {qi }, the statistical charge density for the ions is 7
                                              ions                                    
                                              X                             −qi ϕ(r)
                                ρions (r) =          qi ci λi (r) exp                      .         (2.13)
                                                                             kB T
                                               i

The ion accessibility function λi (r) represents some type of step function that serves to exclude
the ions from the atomistic region. With this form for the density of mobile ions, Eq. (2.12) is
sometimes known as the size-modified version of the (nonlinear) Poisson-Boltzmann equation. 7,64
In the case of a 1:1 electrolyte with monovalent ions (q1 = e = −q2 ), Eq. (2.13) reduces to
                                                                  
                                                            e ϕ(r)
                                 ρions (r) = −2cλ(r) sinh            .                       (2.14)
                                                             kB T
At the physiological ionic strengths, the hyperbolic sine function can be linearized without signifi-
cant error, 65,66 resulting in a linearized Poisson-Boltzmann equation, 7,62
                                   h           i
                              ∇ˆ · ε(r) ∇ϕ(r)
                                         ˆ       = −4πρ(r) + κ2 λ(r) ϕ(r) ,                   (2.15)

                                                            6
where                                                       1/2
                                                   8πe2 c
                                          κ=                        .                             (2.16)
                                                    kB T
The dissolved ions screen electrostatic interactions over a length scale ∼ κ−1 known as the Debye
screening length, such that the potential that appears in Debye-Hückel theory is the attenuated
Coulomb potential e−κr /(εs r). 7,60,67,68
     Within the biomolecular electrostatics community there has been significant discussion regard-
ing the accuracy of the linearization approximation, with studies noting that the nonlinear form
[Eq. (2.12), with Eq. (2.13) for ρions (r)] affords better agreement with explicit solvent simulations
when the ionic strength is high. 66,69 Deficiencies in the Poisson-Boltzmann model itself—even even
in its nonlinear form and especially for polyvalent ions—have also been pointed out. 70 It is therefore
worth noting that for the small solutes that characterize most quantum chemistry applications, the
effect of the mobile ions on Gelst is quite modest, 64,68 although there are effects on activity co-
efficients. 64,71 These effects are presumably magnified for a solute the size of a protein, but the
intermediate size regime has hardly been explored.
     Methods for solving the partial differential equations introduced in this section will be intro-
duced below. First, however, we need to discuss one more aspect of the model problem itself,
namely, the definition a surface that establishes the boundary between atomistic solute and con-
tinuum solvent.

2.2     Solute cavity
For the case of a sharp dielectric boundary, Eq. (2.3) has an analytic solution if the cavity surface
is spherical and contains the entire charge density ρ(r). For a solute consisting of a single point
charge, Q, centered in a spherical cavity of radius R̄ in a medium with dielectric constant ε, this
solution affords the well-known “Born model” for ion solvation, 72,73
                                                          
                                                Q2 ε − 1
                                      ∆GQ = −                .                                 (2.17)
                                                2R̄     ε

Here, ∆G indicates the change in Gelst from its gas-phase value of zero to the solution-phase value
obtained from Eq. (2.6). Replacing the point charge Q by a point dipole µ, the solvation energy is

                                                      (ε − 1)µ2
                                        ∆Gµ = −                  .                                (2.18)
                                                     (2ε + 1)R̄3

(This result is often attributed to Onsager, 74 although it was derived a few years earlier by Bell. 75 )
The dipole solvation energy can alternatively be written ∆Gµ = − 21 (µ · Erxn ), where
                                                     
                                         1 2(ε − 1)
                                Erxn = 3                µ = g1 (ε, R̄) µ                        (2.19)
                                       R̄      2ε + 1
                                       |       {z     }
                                             g1 (ε,R̄)

is the “reaction field” induced by µ. 41 If µ is polarizable (µ = µ0 + α · E), then Eq. (2.19)
provides the earliest example of a SCRF model. 41 Historically, this model was used to formulate a
microscopic theory for the dielectric constant of a polar liquid, 74,76,77 going beyond the mean-field
description contained in the Clausius-Mossotti equation. 78,79 These attempts were not particularly
quantitative, 77 and for modern purposes a dipolar description of the solute constitutes a needless
approximation.

                                                         7
   The aforementioned results for ∆G were quickly generalized by Kirkwood, 80–82 and later by
others, 57,83–87 to an arbitrary multipole in a spherical cavity, with the general result
                                                          ℓ
                               1 X (ℓ + 1)(ε − 1)      1    X                    2
                     Gelst = −                                  Ψ T̂ℓm Ψ                         (2.20)
                               2       ℓ + (ℓ + 1)ε R̄2ℓ+1
                                 ℓ≥0 |         {z        } m=−ℓ
                                              gℓ (ε,R̄)


where the T̂ℓm are spherical multipole operators. 88,89 Since then, analytic results for ellipsoidal
cavities, 82,84 off-center charges, 81 and higher-order off-center multipoles 87 have also been derived,
along with formulas for the interaction of multipoles contained in disjoint spheres with a dielectric
medium in between. 90 Insofar as an arbitrary charge distribution ρ(r) has a single-center multipole
expansion, these results provide an analytic solution for a charge density of arbitrary complexity in
a spherical or ellipsoidal cavity, assuming there is no penetration of ρ(r) into the continuum region.
(The latter effect, known as volume polarization, 91–97 is discussed below.) The multipole expansion
method has been called a “generalized Kirkwood” solvation model, 57 and using multipolar formulas
for R̂0 in Eq. (2.8), it can be turned into a generalized Kirkwood SCRF for quantum chemistry.
Multipolar methods are reviewed elsewhere, 9,98 but have effectively been rendered obsolete by the
polarizable continuum methods described in Section 2.3. In the absence of volume polarization,
these approaches also afford an exact (albeit numerical) solution to the continuum electrostatics
problem, yet can used in conjunction with molecule-shaped cavities.
    A spherical cavity may make sense if a large number of explicit solvent molecules are included
in the atomistic solute region, and such approaches are known as solvent boundary potential meth-
ods. 99–101 These have been developed as replacements for periodic boundary conditions in both
QM/MM simulations 102–108 and in fully quantum-mechanical calculations. 109–112 Spherical cavi-
ties make little sense for single molecules, however, and it is clear from Eq. (2.17) that ∆G will be
quite sensitive to the cavity radius. This is especially problematic if that cavity does not corre-
spond closely to the size of the molecule itself, and results in Section 3.3 demonstrate that even for
realistic “molecule-shaped” cavities, solvation energies are quite sensitive to cavity construction.
    Examples of some molecule-shaped cavity constructions are provided in Fig. 2. A simple union
of atom-centered spheres is often called a van der Waals (vdW) cavity surface. The atomic radii
might simply be empirical parameters of the model, 113 or alternatively covalent radii extracted
from crystal structures, 114,115 or based on calculations of atomic size. 116 In the latter two cases
these radii represent close-contact distances, meaning that an implicit or continuum solvent should
not be allowed to approach all the way to the vdW radii of the solute atoms. This exclusion effect
has been treated in several ways, most commonly by scaling the atomic vdW radii by a factor
α > 1. A scaling factor α = 1.2 was chosen early on, 117 and factors α ≈ 1.1–1.2 have since become
standard choices, albeit with little theoretical justification to choose one value over another within
a modest range. Alternatively, and with somewhat better justification, the atomic vdW radii can
be augmented by a “probe radius” representing the assumed size of a solute molecule, which can
be extracted from the liquid structure of the solvent. For example, Rprobe = 1.4 Å is often used
for water, representing half the distance to the first peak in the oxygen–oxygen radial distribution
function. 118 Values for water as small as Rprobe = 0.2 Å have also been used, however, in an effort
to match solvation energy benchmarks from simulations with explicit solvent. 119 The cavity surface
generated using atomic radii RvdW + Rprobe is known as the solvent-accessible surface (SAS), which
was first introduced as a means to measure accessible surface area in proteins and is often used to
define the ion accessibility function λ(r) in Eq. (2.15). Note that it does not make sense to augment
a scaled vdW radius with a probe radius, as this double counts the size of the exclusion layer.


                                                     8
                                                         solvent-excluded surface (SES)



                             solvent probe
                                   sphere
                                                                        van der Waals
                                                        vdW             (vdW) surface



                     solvent-accessible
                         surface (SAS)




Fig. 2: Illustration of cavity surface definitions using a set of atomic spheres (in gray) whose
envelope defines the vdW surface (in black). The solvent-accessible surface (in green) is defined
either by augmenting the atomic radii by a probe radius (Rprobe , taken here to be smaller than
the vdW radii), or equivalently as the center point of the probe sphere as it rolls over the vdW
surface. The solvent-excluded surface (SES, in magenta, sometimes called the “molecular surface”)
is traced out by arcs of the probe that connect points of contact between the probe and the vdW
surface. The SES eliminates the cusps in the vdW surface that otherwise appear along seams of
intersection between atom-centered spheres.


    Both the vdW surface and the SAS exhibit cusps where atomic spheres intersect. These cusps
are eliminated by solvent-excluded surface (SES) that is generated by the probe sphere as it rolls over
the vdW surface; see Fig. 2. (In principle, this procedure could be applied to eliminate cusps in the
SAS as well, but that is less often done because cusps in the SAS are less problematic, numerically
speaking. 21 ) The center of the probe sphere traces out the SES while its points of contact with
the vdW surface, combined with the concave arcs of the probe sphere that smooth over the cusps,
constitute the SES. (The SES is also known as the Connolly surface, 120 or sometimes simply the
“molecular surface”, 121 as it is probably the closest approximation to the true shape of the molecule.
However, these names have sometimes been used interchangeably or ambiguously in the literature,
and in particular the term “Lee-Richards surface” 122 has been used to mean either the SAS and
the SES. 21,119,123 (The notation used here is standard in the quantum chemistry literature. 124 ) The
SES has an analytic construction, 21,120 although it has most often been constructed numerically,
for visualization purposes.
    To a greater or lesser degree each of these cavity definitions seems physically reasonable, but
beyond that there is little theoretical justification for any of them, and no guarantee that small
changes in one or more atomic radii will not have a significant impact on computed observables. 97,125
It has been suggested that the “optimal” atomic radius for a given atom likely ought to vary as
a function of its partial atomic charge, 126,127 but this effect is generally handled empirically, if at
all. “United-atom” models, in which hydrogen atoms are not given explicit spheres and the radii
of the other atoms are increased to compensate, 126 are also in widespread use. A more justifiable
definition of the solute cavity surface might involve an isocontour of the molecular electron density
ρ(r), 94,96,128–130 as it is the density that is ultimately responsible for molecular size and shape. 131
Isodensity cavity definitions are considered in Section 3.3.
    With the introduction of a molecule-shaped cavity, one must forego analytic solution of Poisson’s
equation. A variety of numerical algorithms have been introduced, either for classical biomolecular
applications, 132–142 or else for quantum electronic structure calculations. 39,64,143–145 Numerically,
Eq. (2.3) and its Poisson-Boltzmann analogue are partial differential equations (for ϕ) that require


                                                   9
discretization of three-dimensional space, which must extend well into the continuum region due
to the (εs r)−1 asymptotic decay of ϕ(r). This necessitates the use of multiresolution techniques
for efficiency. 39,55,62,132,134,142 Worth mentioning also is the Langevin dipoles model, 146–148 which
discretizes the continuum solvent using a three-dimensional grid of point dipoles, and is therefore
a direct realization of the conceptual notion that P is a dipole density.
    As compared to these approaches, each of which requires discretization of three-dimensional
space, a much more efficient two-dimensional formulation of the continuum electrostatics problem
is often feasible. The transformation of Eq. (2.3) from a partial differential equation in three
dimensions to an integral equation in two dimensions (over the cavity surface Γ) defines the class
of methods known as polarizable continuum models (PCMs), 13,15,19 which we next describe.

2.3   Polarizable continuum models
In quantum chemistry, PCMs are so widely used as to be nearly synonymous with continuum
solvation itself. This popularity stems from efficiency, which in turn derives from a transformation
of the volumetric polarization theory of the Poisson or Poisson-Boltzmann equation (Section 2.1)
into a surface charge problem that can be solved with numerical methods that are described in
Section 3.2. That transformation, and the basic working equations of PCMs, are introduced in this
section. Matrix analogues of these integral equations, which define the various PCMs in practice,
are introduced in Section 3.1.
    Physically speaking, polarization of the continuum extends beyond the solute cavity surface,
as indicated pictorially in Fig. 1(b). Transformation of the three-dimensional polarization problem
into a two-dimensional problem defined on the cavity surface Γ relies on a characteristic feature
of a sharp dielectric interface, namely, a discontinuity in the electric field resulting from a buildup
of charge at the interface. This occurs at any dielectric interface, including the one that defines
the boundary between atomistic solute and continuum solvent. Let s ∈ Γ denote a point on the
interface (cavity surface), and let ns be the outward-pointing unit vector normal to the cavity
surface at the point s. At a sharp interface in the permittivity function ε(r), as in Eq. (2.10), the
normal electric field satisfies a “jump” boundary condition, 9,92
                                                              
                                    ˆ ϕ(s)
                          εout ns · ∇              = εin ns · ˆ ϕ(s)
                                                              ∇                .                  (2.21)
                                              s=s+                      s=s−

This ensures that the electric displacement D(r) = ε(r) E(r) is continuous across the interface. 38,41
The notation s± indicates that these are one-sided derivatives to be evaluated immediately inside
(s− ∈ Ω) or outside (s+ ∈ / Ω) of the solute cavity, as ϕ is only semi-differentiable at the interface.
    Polarization of the continuum manifests as a surface charge that accumulates at the boundary
between the atomistic and the continuum region in order to satisfy Eq. (2.21), and whose magnitude
is proportional to the outward-pointing normal electric field at the dielectric interface. 38 Let us call
that charge σ(s), where s ∈ Γ, so as to distinguish it from a volume charge such as ρ(r), where
r ∈ R3 . Introducing the notation ∂ˆs = ns · ∇ˆ to indicate the normal derivative, the surface charge
at the dielectric boundary can be expressed in several equivalent ways, 14,92 two of which are
                                                                    
                        1 εout − εin ˆ                   1 εout − εin ˆ
                σ(s) =                  ∂ s ϕ(s)      =                   ∂ s ϕ(s)      .         (2.22)
                       4π       εin              s=s+   4π       εout              s=s−

These differ depending on whether the normal electric field is evaluated immediately inside or
outside of the cavity. In the usual quantum chemistry case where εin = 1 and εout = εs , the first
form of this equation (in which the field is evaluated within the continuum region) is merely the


                                                    10
definition of the polarization,                                     
                                                            εs − 1
                                                P=                       E,                      (2.23)
                                                              4π
as obtained from Eq. (2.1). If the entirety of the solute charge ρ(r) is confined within the cavity
surface, then Eq. (2.22) is simply a reflection of Gauss’ Law. For cavities that are realistic approx-
imations to the size and shape of a molecular solute, however, the tails of a quantum-mechanical
charge distribution will penetrate into the continuum region. 91–97 This outlying or “escaped” charge
is discussed in more detail below but will be ignored for now.
    It has been argued that the second form of Eq. (2.22), in which the derivative is evaluated
inside of the cavity, should be used in order to avoid “self-polarization” of the medium. 9 Then
taking εin = 1 and εout = εs and recognizing that E = −∇ϕ, ˆ one obtains a model
                                                                             
                         1 εs − 1  ρ             σ
                                                              1 εs − 1       ∂ϕ
              σ(s) = −                 E (s) + E (s) · ns =                                      (2.24)
                        4π     εs     |        {z         } 4π       εs       ∂ns s=s−
                                                       E⊥ (s)


that corresponds to the original PCM introduced by Tomasi and co-workers. 3–5,9 Here, the induced
surface charge density σ(s) is proportional to the outward-directed normal electric field, E⊥ (s) =
E(s)·ns , which is separated into two contributions in Eq. (2.24), analogous to how ϕ(r) is partitioned
in Eq. (2.4). The contribution Eρ = −∇ϕ   ˆ ρ comes from the solute, whose electrostatic potential
  ρ                                     σ
ϕ (r) is defined in Eq. (2.4), whereas E = −∇ϕ ˆ σ can be identified as the reaction-field contribution
and originates in the electrostatic potential
                                                Z
                                        σ              σ(s)
                                       ϕ (r) =                ds                                  (2.25)
                                                 s∈Γ ks − rk

that is generated by the surface charge σ. To compute ϕσ (r), it is only necessary to discretize
the cavity surface Γ rather than the whole of three-dimensional space. Historically, Eq. (2.24)
was the first example of what has been called an apparent surface charge (ASC) formulation of
the continuum electrostatics problem. Nowadays the term “ASC model” is essentially synonymous
with PCM, as multipolar expansions and other simplified treatments see little use in contemporary
quantum chemistry because the model defined by Eq. (2.24) makes it easy to use the exact solute
density ρ(r) along with a cavity or arbitrary shape. (Discretization of the surface is considered in
Section 3.) For a spherical cavity, Eq. (2.24) is equivalent to the use of the Kirkwood multipolar
expansion formulas if the latter are carried to arbitrary order, as can be proven explicitly. 149
    In early literature, the model defined by Eq. (2.24) is often called “the” ASC-PCM, 9 whereas in
contemporary literature it is usually called D-PCM, 13,15 or sometimes the Miertuš-Scrocco-Tomasi
model. 98,150 The somewhat arbitrary decision to use the right side of Eq. (2.22) can be avoided,
and a somewhat different version of this model obtained, by noting that the discontinuity in E⊥ at
the cavity surface can be expressed as 92

                                  ∂ˆ s ϕσ (s)           = 2πσ(s) + ∂ˆs ϕσ (s)                   (2.26a)
                                                s=s−

                                  ∂ˆs ϕσ (s)            = −2πσ(s) + ∂ˆ s ϕσ (s) .               (2.26b)
                                                s=s+

Adding these two equations and combining them with Eq. (2.22) affords a different expression for
the surface charge, 92,149,151         
                                       fε ˆ  ρ              
                               σ(s) =      ∂ s ϕ (s) + ϕσ (s) ,                           (2.27)
                                       2π

                                                             11
in which the normal derivative is evaluated at (rather than near) the point s ∈ Γ. The permittivity-
dependent prefactor in this expression is
                                                  εout − εin
                                           fε =              .                                   (2.28)
                                                  εout + εin
(For a QM solute the only sensible choice is εin = 1, but the more general notation is retained
for now, in order to accommodate different values of εin that are sometimes used in biomolecular
electrostatics calculations. 7,44–48 )
    The model of Eq. (2.27) can be recast in a convenient form by defining an operator D̂ † that
acts on surface functions (s ∈ Γ) according to 94–96
                                       Z                          
                             †               ′   ′ ∂         1           σ
                          D̂ σ(s) =        ds σ(s )             ′k
                                                                     = −E⊥ (s) .          (2.29)
                                         Γ          ∂ns   ks − s

The first equality defines D̂ † and the second follows upon realization that ∂/∂ns = ns · ∇  ˆ can be
pulled outside of the integral, leaving (ns · ˆ       σ       σ                      †
                                                ∇)ϕ (s) = −E⊥ (s). The operator D̂ is often called
  ∗
D̂ in the literature, 94–96,152 but is the adjoint of the double-layer operator D̂ that is introduced
below, and the notation used here is selected to reflect that fact. Using D̂ † to rewrite Eq. (2.27)
affords an alternative to Eq. (2.24), namely
                                                  
                                       2π          †           ρ
                                            1̂ − D̂ σ(s) = −E⊥   (s) .                          (2.30)
                                       fε
This equation makes clear that the sole ingredient needed to determine the induced surface charge
is                                                          ρ
                               ρ              ˆ   ρ          ∂ϕ
                             E⊥ (s) = −(ns · ∇)ϕ (s) = −           ,                        (2.31)
                                                             ∂ns
which is the normal electric field due to the solute, evaluated at the cavity surface. Chipman refers
to Eq. (2.30) as the surface polarization for electrostatics (SPE) method, 95 but others have called
it D-PCM, 152 or simply PCM. 153
    The D-PCM approach, which requires explicit calculation of the electric field at the cavity
surface, has largely been superseded by alternative ASC-PCMs that determines σ(s) using only
electrostatic potentials and not their derivatives, which might be more sensitive to discretization
error. The modern approach is known as the integral equation formalism (IEF-) PCM, 152,154 and
is based on a reformulation of the continuum electrostatics problem as a boundary-value prob-
lem. 155–157 This reformulation is exact provided that the escaped charge is zero (e.g., for a classical
solute), and we continue to defer a discussion of the escaped charge problem. IEF-PCM is for-
mulated in terms of integral operators Ŝ and D̂ that act on surface functions (defined on Γ) to
generate the single- and double-layer potentials, respectively. These operators are defined by
                                            Z
                                                   σ(s′ )
                                   Ŝσ(s) =    ds′ ′       = ϕσ (s) ,                            (2.32)
                                             Γ    ks  − sk
which generates the electrostatic potential associated with the surface charge distribution σ(s), and
                                        Z                         
                                              ′   ′    ∂      1
                              D̂σ(s) =      ds σ(s )                  ,                        (2.33)
                                          Γ          ∂ns′ ks′ − sk
                                                     |     {z       }
                                                            D(s,s′ )

which generates the double-layer potential, in the language of integral equations. 152 [The operator
D̂ is the adjoint of D̂ † in Eq. (2.29), 13 as becomes clear upon reversing the indices of the kernel

                                                   12
D(s, s′ ).] Using Ŝ and D̂, the continuum electrostatics problem can be recast as an integral equation
on the surface of the cavity: 13
                                           
                                  2π                                
                                       1̂ − D̂ Ŝσ(s) = − 2π 1̂ + D̂ ϕρ (s) .                    (2.34)
                                  fε
Equation (2.34) is the basic working equation of IEF-PCM. In early papers the working equation
                                                    ρ
was formulated somewhat differently, requiring E⊥      in addition to ϕρ . 155–157 That form is sometimes
called simply “IEF”, 95,152 to distinguish it from the IEF-PCM that requires ϕρ but not its deriva-
tive, and should therefore be more stable numerically. Equivalence of the two forms is demonstrated
in Ref. 158, and in fact Eq. (2.34) can be cast in a variety of equivalent forms, 94,95,152 by taking
advantage of the fact that Ŝ = Ŝ † and
                                              D̂Ŝ = Ŝ D̂ † .                                      (2.35)
However, except for spherical cavities (for which D̂ = D̂ † ), 94 the operator identity in Eq. (2.35)
is not generally preserved upon discretization, 20,153 with the practical result that various forms
of Eq. (2.34) are inequivalent as finite-dimensional matrix equations. 19,20 These equations are dis-
cussed in Section 3.1.
    For now, we simply note that Eq. (2.34) is an exact reformulation of the classical continuum
electrostatics problem, meaning the problem that is defined by Poisson’s equation with a sharp
dielectric boundary and where the solute’s charge density ρ(r) is contained entirely within the
cavity. That caveat is satisfied if the solute consists of atomic point charges (or higher-order
multipoles, including polarizable ones) from a force field. In that case, solution of Eq. (2.34) for
σ(s) constitutes an exact solution to the electrostatics problem, and the electrostatic solvation
energy is 18                        Z                      Z
                                  1                      1
                          Gelst =       ϕσ (r) ρ(r) dr =     ϕρ (s) σ(s) ds .                  (2.36)
                                  2 R3                   2 Γ
These are analogous to the two forms of Gelst that are given in Eq. (2.6), however the second form
in Eq. (2.36) requires only surface integration. Using this ASC formulation, in lieu of discretizing
three-dimensional space, has significant advantages over the traditional approach to biomolecular
electrostatics, which require discretization far enough into the continuum such that ϕρ (r) has
decayed to zero. Most contemporary biomolecular electrostatics calculations are also based on finite-
difference evaluation of the Laplacian ˆ  ∇2 ϕ(r), 159,160 which leads to problems in obtaining smooth
forces for molecular dynamics. 161–163 Discretization of the action of D̂ and Ŝ on surface functions can
be accomplished in a manner that affords inherently smooth forces; 17–19 see Section 3.2. Especially
for biomolecular applications it is worth noting that the IEF-PCM has been adapted to provide
a solution to the linearized Poisson-Boltzmann problem, 68,155,156,164 including the “size-modified”
version that accounts for finite size of the mobile ions. 68 Large biomolecular solutes have been
tackled in this way, 19,165–167 but this requires iterative solvers for the matrix equations that define
the PCM. Linear-scaling implementations that can handle biomolecular solutes are discussed in
Section 3.4.
    For QM solutes, however, there is always escaped charge for realistic cavity sizes, and therefore
IEF-PCM is not a fully equivalent substitute for Poisson’s equation. The extent to which this is
a problem is unclear from the original derivation of IEF-PCM provided by Cancès et al., 152,155–157
which does not provide much physical insight, nor does it emphasize the assumption (inherent in the
derivation) that there is no outlying charge. That issue was addressed directly by Chipman, 92–95
who assumes from the start that there is outlying charge and that as a consequence the correct
reaction-field potential is not ϕσ (r) but rather
                                       ϕrxn (r) = ϕσ (r) + ϕβ (r) ,                                (2.37)

                                                   13
where ϕσ (r) arises from the accumulation of charge σ(s) at the dielectric interface but is accompa-
nied by an additional potential ϕβ (r) due to volume polarization. The latter originates with the tail
of the solute’s charge density that extends beyond the cavity surface. Including an additional term
for ϕβ on the right side of Eq. (2.27), and recognizing that ∂ˆs ϕσ (s) = D̂ † σ(s), an exact equation
for the surface charge that includes the effects of volume polarization is 94
                                  
                                  fε                fε  ˆ ρ                   
                            1̂ −       D̂ † σ(s) =      ∂ s ϕ (s) + ∂ˆ s ϕβ (s)
                                  2π               2π
                                                                                                (2.38)
                                                      fε  ρ          β     
                                                 =−       E (s) + E⊥ (s) .
                                                     2π ⊥
The potential ϕβ (r) can be modeled as the electrostatic potential generated by a charge density
                                     (
                                       0                  for r ∈ Ω
                             β(r) =      −1     −1
                                                                                           (2.39)
                                        εout − εin ρ(r) for r ∈ /Ω
that satisfies a vacuum-like Poisson equation,
                                         ˆ 2 ϕβ (r) = −4πβ(r) .
                                         ∇                                                       (2.40)
Equation (2.38) can be solved numerically, 91 to afford an exact solution to the continuum electro-
statics problem, in a method that Chipman calls surface and volume polarization for electrostatics
(SVPE). 95 This approach is challenging in practice because the volume charge density β(r) is dis-
continuous at the cavity surface, however Eq. (2.38) can be recast into a form that requires only
                           ρ
the normal electric field E⊥ (s) at the cavity surface, along with the solution of the ASC-PCM that
                     96
is introduced next. This provides a practical means to access exact electrostatics, even in the
presence of outlying charge, while staying within a two-dimensional surface integral formalism.
    A simplified (if approximate) treatment is possible, which eliminates the normal electric field
in Eq. (2.38) and ultimately connects back to IEF-PCM. This model is obtained by introducing an
additional surface charge α(s), distinct from σ(s), that is defined by the condition
                                           Ŝα(s) = ϕβ (s) ,                                     (2.41)
meaning that its electrostatic potential ϕα = Ŝα must reproduce ϕβ on the cavity surface. 91–94
This also ensures that ϕα (r) = ϕβ (r) for all interior points r ∈ Ω, and while the two potentials may
differ outside of the cavity, those contributions are scaled by ε−1s and therefore less important. (This
is confirmed in numerical tests. 91,97 ) Assuming that the true surface charge, augmented to reflect
volume polarization, is σ̃(s) = α(s) + σ(s), the term ∂ˆ s ϕβ (s) in Eq. (2.38) can be manipulated into
a form that is consistent with the ASC formalism. 94 The result is a model that Chipman has called
surface and simulation of volume polarization for electrostatics [SS(V)PE], 94–96
                                                                   
                                      fε †                  1
                              Ŝ 1̂ −    D̂ σ̃(s) = fε         D̂ − 1̂ ϕρ (s) .                   (2.42)
                                      2π                   2π
                              |      {z     }         |       {z      }
                                   K̂ε                     Ŷε

Using the identity in Eq. (2.35), this equation is easily rearranged to afford Eq. (2.34) that defines
IEF-PCM, and therefore the two models are equivalent at the level of integral operators. 94,95,158
(They differ in practice, as described in Section 3.1.) Importantly, what the derivation of SS(V)PE
makes clear is that the surface charge that is determined by solving Eq. (2.34) implicitly contains
the (approximate) effects of volume polarization, which was not evident from the derivation by
Cancès and co-workers. 152,155–157 Chipman’s derivation clarifies that both approaches constitute
an exact treatment of electrostatic interactions in the limiting case that there is no escaped charge
(α ≡ 0).

                                                  14
Table 1: Electrostatic solvation energies in toluene (εs = 2.4) and in water (εs = 78.3), computed
with various approaches.a The SVPE method [Eq. (2.38)] affords the exact result and SPE is the
method in Eq. (2.30).
       Solute          εs                        Gelst (kcal/mol)                      Qout
                              SVPE     SS(V)PE         SPE           COSMOb           (a.u.)c
                                                                 ζ=0      ζ = 1/2
       H2 O            2.4    −3.9       −3.9         −4.0       −4.8     −3.9
       CH3 CONH2       2.4    −5.3       −5.0         −5.2       −5.9     −4.8
       NO+             2.4 −52.2        −52.2        −55.3     −52.5     −43.4
       CN−             2.4 −39.4        −39.4        −35.0     −39.4     −32.5
       H2 O           78.3    −8.6       −8.6         −8.7       −8.6     −8.6       −0.06
       CH3 CONH2 78.3 −10.9             −10.8        −11.1     −10.9     −10.8       −0.15
       NO+            78.3 −89.5        −89.5        −94.7     −89.5     −88.9       −0.07
       CN−            78.3 −67.4        −67.3        −56.8     −67.3     −66.9       −0.17
      a
        From Ref. 95; all calculations used an isodensity cavity with ρ0 = 0.001 a.u.. b Using a renormalization
      factor f˜ε (ζ), Eq. (2.45). c From Ref. 97.


2.4   Comparison of ASC-PCMs
Table 1 presents electrostatic solvation energies (Gelst ) for several small molecules and ions, in both a
low-dielectric solvent (toluene, εs = 2.4) and a high-dielectric solvent (water, εs = 78). 95 The SVPE
method [Eq. (2.38)] affords the exact result but SS(V)PE solvation energies are within 0.1 kcal/mol.
In comparison, the SPE method of Eq. (2.30), which is equivalent to D-PCM, exhibits noticeable
differences, especially for ions. The amount of outlying charge (Qout ) is also quantified in Table 1.
For future reference we note the obvious definitions
                                              Z
                                        Qin =       ρ(r) dr                                        (2.43a)
                                                r∈Ω
                                              Z
                                       Qout =      ρ(r) dr − Qin .                                 (2.43b)
                                                      R3

The charge density ρ(r) includes both nuclei and electrons, so Qin +Qout = 0 for a neutral molecule.
The escaped charge is generally |Qin | ≈ 0.1–0.2e for small solutes. 91,97
    By arbitrarily dropping the D̂- and D̂ † -dependent terms in Eq. (2.42), one obtains a model
Ŝσ = −fε ϕρ that we rewrite as
                                       Ŝσ(s) = −f˜ε (ζ) ϕρ (s) .                             (2.44)
This introduces a parameter ζ into the permittivity factor that was defined in Eq. (2.28), rewriting
it as
                                                   εs − 1
                                         f˜ε (ζ) =                                            (2.45)
                                                   εs + ζ
for the usual QM case where εin = 1 and εout = εs . The model in Eq. (2.44) has a long history
and a variety of names, one of which is the conductor-like screening model (COSMO). 168 Since the
neglected double-layer operator embodies the electric field discontinuity at the cavity surface, this
condition is not satisfied when these terms are neglected to obtain Eq. (2.44), 68,152 and rescaling
the surface charge by f˜ε (ζ) can be seen as an attempt to mimic the effect of the jump boundary
condition.
    The name COSMO hints at the original derivation of the model in Eq. (2.44): for a conductor
(εs = ∞), the total electrostatic potential vanishes at the cavity surface and the ASC formulation

                                                           15
of the Poisson problem is simply Ŝσ = −ϕρ . 93 A scaling factor f˜ε (ζ) is then introduced to account
for the fact that εs is finite, and that there is charge penetration into the medium. The scaling
factor [Eq. (2.45)] can be justified based on the normalization condition for the total surface charge,
which is 92,156,169                Z                         
                                                      1    1
                                       σ(s) ds = −      −       Qin .                            (2.46)
                                     Γ               εin εout
For εin = 1 and εout = εs , the total surface charge Qsurf = −[(εs − 1)/εs ]Qin , and it was originally
suggested to take ζ = 1/2 in order to renormalize for outlying charge, 168 although the value ζ = 0
was later recommended for ions, 170 and values 0 ≤ ζ ≤ 2 have also been used. 10 The choice ζ = 0
has variously been called the “generalized COSMO” (GCOSMO) model, 171–174 or the conductor-
like PCM (C-PCM). 175,176 In fact, the normalization condition in Eq. (2.46) forms the basis of
various ad hoc attempts to rescale the surface charge, 3,5,177–179 but tests against exact results from
Poisson’s equation suggest that none of these schemes is very satisfactory. 91 Charge rescaling also
complicates analytic energy gradients. 180
    At a practical level, the choice ζ = 1/2 for neutral solutes and ζ = 0 for ions works remarkably
well in comparison to the IEF-PCM and SS(V)PE methods, even in low-dielectric solvents. This is
suggested by the smattering of data in Table 1 and confirmed by calculations on a much larger data
set, for which the statistical difference between these methods is . 0.1 kcal/mol for neutral solutes
and ≈ 0.5 kcal/mol for ions, even at εs = 2. 170 Some justification for these parameter choices is
found in the fact that f˜ε (0) looks like the ε-dependent factor in the Born ion model [Eq. (2.17)],
whereas f˜ε (1/2) affords the prefactor in the Bell-Onsager model of dipole solvation [Eq. (2.18)].
With appropriate choice of ζ, COSMO is therefore little different from SS(V)PE or IEF-PCM
in practice, and considerably simpler. It can be extended in a straightforward way to solvents
with nonzero ionic strength, with or without size exclusion. 68 For large biomolecular applications
in aqueous solvent, there seems little reason not to use this approach, in lieu of exact but more
complicated models, and as an alternative to finite-difference solution of Poisson’s equation.


3     Implementation
Poisson’s equation with a sharp dielectric interface makes for a cute problem in applied mathematics
and there has sometimes been a tendency in that community to analyze its properties, or those of
the various cavity surfaces discussed in Section 2.2, at fixed molecular geometries only. This is not
useful for chemistry, which requires a potential energy surface. Exploration of that surface requires
gradients of the total energy functional G[Ψ], which in turn requires discretization of the integral
equations introduced above. In addition, many spectroscopic observables can be formulated as
analytic energy derivatives, 181–183 so a solution-phase theory that encompasses molecular properties
requires a differentiable model. Numerical implementation of the models introduced in Section 2 is
the topic of this section. We deal specifically with PCMs in Sections 3.1 and 3.2, but admit more
general Poisson equation models in Section 3.3. Linear-scaling implementations, which are useful
for hybrid QM/MM simulations with PCM boundary conditions, are discussed in Section 3.4.

3.1   Matrix equations for PCMs
In practice, the integral equation that defines any PCM must be discretized in order to obtain a
finite-dimensional matrix equation. As such, it is convenient to rewrite the equation that defines
SS(V)PE and IEF-PCM as
                                        K̂ε σ(s) = Ŷε ϕρ (s) ,                              (3.1)


                                                  16
       Table 2: Matrices that define various PCMs according to Kε q = Yε vρ [Eq. (3.2)].
                    Method           Matrix Kε                              Matrix Yε
                    C-PCMa,b         S                                      −f˜ε (0) 1
                    COSMOb           S                                      −f˜ε (ζ) 1
                    DESMOc           S                                      −1 + (1/ε)M
                                                                                            
                    SS(V)PEd         S − (fε /4π)(DAS + SAD† )              −fε 1 − (1/2π)DA
                                                                                            
                    IEF-PCMd         S − (fε /2π)DAS                        −fε 1 − (1/2π)DA
                 a
                     Also known as GCOSMO. b f˜ε (ζ) = (ε − 1)/(ε + ζ). c Mij = δij ϕρκ (si )/ϕρ0 (si ).
                d
                    fε = (ε − 1)/(ε + 1).


which is simply a restatement of Eq. (2.42). Using various definitions for K̂ε and Ŷε , this equation
can encompass a whole family of ASC-PCMs including the simplified C-PCM and COSMO methods
(Table 2). 19,20,95,129
    To discretize Eq. (3.1), one must first generate a surface grid of points si ∈ Γ. The surface
charge distribution σ(s) is thereby replaced by a set of point charges {qi } at the discretization
points {si }. The details of this procedure are discussed in the next section but for now it suffices
to introduce a matrix notation
                                            Kε q = Yε vρ                                         (3.2)
for the discretized form ofEq. (3.1), where q is a vector of surface charges and vρ denotes the
molecular electrostatic potential evaluated at the cavity surface, υiρ = ϕρ (si ). In this form, surface
integrals are replaced by scalar products, e.g., Gelst = 21 q · vρ replaces Eq. (2.36). An alternative
form of Eq. (3.2) that is sometimes encountered is q = Qε vρ where Qε = K−1          ε Yε , but whereas
                                          −1
the corresponding operator Q̂ε = K̂ε Ŷε is self-adjoint, this property is generally not preserved by
discretization except in the special case of C-PCM and COSMO. 18 This means that the mapping
from Eq. (3.1) to Eq. (3.2) is not unique, because discretization fails to preserve the condition D̂ Ŝ =
Ŝ D̂ † . 20 In matrix form, this implies that DAS 6= SAD† (except for spherical cavities), 20,153 where
A is a diagonal matrix consisting of the surface area ai associated with each discretization point
si . This leads to an ambiguity in the matrix representation of the operator K̂ε = Ŝ − (fε /2π)Ŝ D̂ †
[Eq. (2.42)], since it can be argued that any matrix of the form
                                              
                                               fε                     
                                   Kε = S −         c1 DAS + c2 SAD† .                              (3.3)
                                               4π |        {z         }
                                                                      X

is an equally valid representation, provided that c1 + c2 = 1. 20 The various choices for X are
inequivalent in matrix form. Historically, IEF-PCM has been implemented using X = DAS
(that is, c1 = 1 and c2 = 0), whereas SS(V)PE was implemented using the symmetrized matrix
(DAS + SAD† )/2. 19,95 This is indicated in Table 2, which provides matrix definitions for these and
other commonly-encountered PCMs. Precise definitions of the matrices S and D that represent
the operators Ŝ and D̂ can be found elsewhere. 18–20,124,129 These depend somewhat upon the dis-
cretization algorithm that is selected, but generally Sij represents the Coulomb interaction between
qi and qj (which is straightforward to discretize except when i = j), whereas Dij incorporates the
effects of the outward-pointing electric field.
    In the absence of outlying charge, the IEF-PCM and SS(V)PE models are exact up to dis-
cretization errors, which can be driven to zero in a controlled way. Although this fact follows from

                                                           17
                                                                                                                                           h
                                                                                                                                           beexa            Et
          (a)                                                                                               (b)
                                                                                                                                                              O
                                                                                                                                                            C H
                                                                                                                                              nz ne          H
                                                                                                                                           Et e n e
                                                                                                                                             2O             H2O
                                                                                                                                                               3C N
                                                         1
                                                    10




        |Gelst(PCM) – Gelst(APBS)| Ê
                                                                                                                                 –25
                                                                                     †
                                                                           X = SAD                                               –30
                                                                                                                                                                   X = SAD
                                                                                                                                                                           †




                                                                                                              Gelst (kcal/mol)
                                                    100


                                       (kcal/mol)
                                                                                                                                 –35                               X = DAS (IEF-PCM)
                                                                                                                                                                   C-PCM
                                                                                                                                 –40

                                                    10–1                                                                         –45

                                                                                     X = DAS                                     –50

                                                                                                                                 –55
                                                    10–2
                                                             A C F G I L M N P Q S T V W Y H K R E D                                   1               10            100         1000
                                                                         amino acids                                                                  dielectric constant, ε


Fig. 3: (a) Comparison of aqueous solvation energies, |Gelst (PCM) − Gelst (APBS)|, computed
using either an ASC-PCM or else by numerical solution of Poisson’s equation using the apbs
software. The data set of solutes consists of amino acids described using atomic partial charges
from a force field, so that there is no outlying charge. The traditional implementation of IEF-PCM
corresponds to X = DAS (see Table 2) but results are also shown for the transpose matrix, SAD† ,
and SS(V)PE is essentially the average of these two choices. (b) Convergence of Gelst for classical
histidine as a function of the solvent’s dielectric constant, using the SwiG discretization scheme
described in Section 3.2. Dielectric constants for a few common solvents are indicated along the
top axis. Adapted from Ref. 20; copyright 2011 Elsevier.


the derivation in Section 2.3, it is worth emphasizing via numerical calculations. For classical so-
lutes with no outlying charge, which are described using atomic partial charges from a force field,
Fig. 3(a) presents a comparison of PCM solvation energies to those obtained by numerical solu-
tion of Poisson’s equation, 19,20 using a standard multiresolution algorithm as implemented in the
apbs software. 184 To examine the ambiguity regarding the choice of X, these calculations test both
X = DAS (i.e., IEF-PCM) and also X = SAD† ; the SS(V)PE model should be essentially the
average of these two choices. Calculations in Fig. 3 use dense but finite discretization grids, and a
small systematic discrepancy is evident between the two choices of X, indicating a systematic dis-
crepancy between SS(V)PE and IEF-PCM. Numerical values of Gelst obtained using the IEF-PCM
choice of X agree to within . 0.1 kcal/mol of apbs results, demonstrating the operational equiv-
alence of the ASC and the volumetric implementation of continuum electrostatics. This renders
the Kirkwood (multipolar expansion) formulas obsolete, since the requisite formulas are only valid
in the absence of escaped charge anyway, and in that case the ASC-PCM formalism furnishes an
exact numerical solution to the continuum electrostatics problem, for cavities of arbitrary shape,
while also providing a correction for outlying charge. 94,96,169
    The conductor-like model (C-PCM) represents the high-dielectric limit of IEF-PCM and the two
models do indeed become equivalent as ε → ∞, 20,68,93 as demonstrated numerically in Fig. 3(b).
In practice, there is little difference between the two models already for moderately polar solvents.
For ε > 10, there seems little justification for the increased complexity of IEF-PCM relative to C-
PCM. That said, for non-spherical cavities only the X = DAS form of the Kε matrix achieves the
correct conductor limit for finite discretization grids, as demonstrated by both formal and numerical
arguments. 20 In general, D̂ † proves more challenging to implement as compared to D̂, 20,185 so the
absence of D̂ † is one reason to prefer the IEF-PCM form with X = DAS.
    It is illustrative to note that C-PCM can be derived in an alternative way, 68 which also general-
izes the method to the Poisson-Boltzmann case in which the solvent contains a dissolved electrolyte.


                                                                                                       18
This can be done by introducing the following ansatz for the electrostatic potential: 19,68
                                     (
                                        ϕρ0 (r) + ϕσ0 (r) for r ∈ Ω
                              ϕ(r) =                                .                             (3.4)
                                        ϕρκ (r)/ε         for r ∈
                                                                /Ω

Within the solute cavity, this looks like the solute’s electrostatic potential (ϕρ0 ≡ ϕρ ) plus that
arising from the apparent surface charge, whereas outside of the cavity the potential is modified to
include screening by dissolved ions:
                                       Z
                                               exp(−κkr − r′ k) ′
                              ϕρκ (r) = ρ(r′ )                   dr .                          (3.5)
                                                   kr − r′ k

The screened Coulomb potential e−κr /(εs r) is the form encountered in Debye-Hückel theory, 7,60,67,68
with screening length κ−1 that is defined in Eq. (2.16). C-PCM is immediately recovered by
requiring ϕ(r) in Eq. (3.4) to remain continuous across the solute cavity surface. 68 This simple
ansatz cannot, however, be made to satisfy the jump boundary condition in Eq. (2.21) and incurs
an error of O(1/ε). 19,68 (This is consistent with the fact that C-PCM can be “derived” from
IEF-PCM simply by dropping the D̂- and D̂ † -dependent terms from IEF-PCM and rescaling the
surface charge to compensate, 152 as described in Section 2.4.) The simple ansatz in Eq. (3.4) is
easily modifiable to incorporate the effects of an ion exclusion layer (Stern layer) around the solute
cavity, as in the size-modified Poisson-Boltzmann equation of Eq. (2.12), where the ion accessibility
function λ(r) serves the same purpose. In homage to GCOSMO, and in recognition of the fact that
this approach generalizes Debye-Hückel theory to cavities of arbitrary shape, this approach has
been named the Debye-Hückel-like screening model (DESMO). 19,68

3.2   Discretization
Having introduced various PCMs in matrix form, we now turn to the details of discretizing the
cavity surface. Historically, this has been accomplished using various “tessellation” schemes, 124
in which small, flat surface elements approximate the curved surface of the cavity. The “gepol”
algorithm 186–189 is a popular version of this finite-element approach, and an example of a molecu-
lar cavity discretized in this way is presented in Fig. 4(a). This approach has several limitations,
however, including the fact that the number of tesserae per atomic sphere cannot be increased
arbitrarily and thus the discretization error cannot be systematically driven to zero. 20 Further-
more, the solid geometry of the tessellation procedure is complicated, leading to very complex
formulas for surface areas 190 and analytic energy gradients. 191 (In fact, second derivatives of the
tesserae areas ai were considered sufficiently complicated that they were not originally formulated,
and the PCM Hessian was implemented in a semi-analytic way, via finite-difference evaluation of
∂ 2 ai /∂x∂y. 153 ) More recently, these complexities have been overcome by discretizing the surface
using atom-centered Lebedev grids, 17–21,192–194 which are already widely used in density functional
theory, 195–198 and therefore widely available in quantum chemistry codes. An example is depicted
in Fig. 4(b), where the outline of the vdW surface is evident even though only the discretization
grid points (and the underlying nuclear framework) are shown. Relative to gepol and other tessel-
lation schemes, Lebedev grids have the advantage of being systematically improvable so that results
can be converged to the infinite-grid limit. 18,20 Fully analytic Hessians have been formulated and
implemented. 199
     An important issue faced by both tessellation and quadrature is ensuring that the discretization
algorithm produces a smooth potential energy surface as the atoms are displaced. The appearance


                                                  19
                         (a)                           (b)




Fig. 4: (a) Example of a molecular surface (top) and its tessellation using the gepol algorithm
(bottom). (b) Surface discretization grid for a double-stranded segment of DNA. Panel (a) is
reprinted from Ref. 15; copyright 2012 John Wiley & Sons.

of discontinuities in molecular surface area algorithms used in biomolecular electrostatics calcula-
tions was pointed out long ago, 200 and discontinuities are likely the cause of anecodotal complaints
about slow convergence of geometry optimizations using PCMs. These discontinuities arise because
grid points may disappear into (or emerge from within) the interior of the solute cavity, as dis-
placement of the nuclei modifies the extent of interpenetration amongst the atomic spheres that
define the cavity. An example is shown in Fig. 5(a), which plots convergence of the energy during
geometry optimization of (adenine)(H2 O)52 in implicit solvent. Two discretization algorithms, the
variable tesserae number (VTN) method 201 and the fixed points with variable areas (FixPVA) ap-
proach, 202 are shown to exhibit repeated spikes in the energy. 17 The VTN algorithm uses a fixed
surface grid that unceremoniously discards surface elements that are swallowed by the cavity, and
it is unsurprising that the corresponding potential surface exhibits discontinuities, although their
magnitude (> 20 kcal/mol in one case) is disturbing. The FixPVA algorithm, however, specifically
introduces a switching function to attenuate the surface area of each atomic tesserae within the
cavity’s interior. In fact, the sharp changes in energy along the FixPVA optimization in Fig. 5(a)
are not discontinuities per se but rather near-singularities induced by the switching function, which
allows surface discretization charges to approach one another much more closely as compared to
the VTN scheme. 17,20
     To avoid this, one can use a combination of a switching function with Gaussian blurring of the
surface charges, as illustrated in Fig. 5(b), in what has been called the switching/Gaussian (SwiG)
discretization procedure. This ensures that Coulomb interactions between surface discretization
elements remain finite even as the distance between them approaches zero. Such a procedure was
originally developed by York and Karplus to obtain a “smooth COSMO”, 192 then later extended
by Lange and Herbert to the complete family of PCMs. 17,18,20,21 This scheme uses Lebedev points
to discretize the surface rather than tesserae of finite area. Nevertheless, the solvent-accessible
surface area (SASA) for atom B (whose radius is RB ) is easily defined:
                                                        grid
                                                        X
                                                2
                                     SASA(B) = RB              wi Fi .                            (3.6)
                                                        i∈B

Here, wi is the quadrature weight for Lebedev discretization point si , and Fi is the switching
function associated with that point (0 ≤ Fi ≤ 1), so ai = wi Fi is the surface area that is assigned to
the point si . 17 Equation (3.6) is considerably simpler than geometric algorithms for determining the

                                                  20
            (a)                                                                      (b)
                                                                                                           q1
                               –570                                                                                A    B
                                                                                                           q2
                               –580                                                                         q3
                                                                                                             ...




           energy (kcal/mol)
                               –590
                                                                                     (c)
                                                                                                  14
                               –600
                                                                                                  13
                                                                      VTN
                               –610                                                    Gnonelst   12
                                                           SwiG                                                            VTN
                                                                                                                           FixPVA
                                                                                     (kcal/mol)
                               –620                                                               11                       SwiG
                                                                       FixPVA                     10
                               –630
                                                                                                   9
                                      0   200   400     600     800    1000   1200                     2     3     4   5      6     7
                                                optimization step                                                  RAB (Å)


Fig. 5: Demonstration of the SwiG-PCM discretization approach. (a) Geometry optimization
trajectories of (adenine)(H2 O)52 in a C-PCM representation of bulk water, using several different
algorithms to discretize the vdW cavity surface. (The surface itself is not shown, but the atomistic
region appears in the blue inset.) Optimizations are performed in Cartesian coordinates so the total
number of steps is large. (b) Schematic of the SwiG discretization algorithm, in which the surface
charges {qi } are subject to Gaussian blurring and also to a switching function that attenuates
the quadratures weights near the cavity surface. (c) Nonelectrostatic solvation energy (Gnonelst ) as
spheres A and B are pulled part. The value of Gnonelst is related to the solvent-exposed surface area
and inherits any discontinuities in the surface area function. Panels (a) and (c) are adapted from
Ref. 17; copyright 2010 American Chemical Society.


exposed surface areas. 190 As discussed in Section 4.1, models of the nonelectrostatic contributions
to the solvation energy usually include terms proportional to the solvent-exposed surface area so
continuity of the potential energy surface also demands that the surface area be a continuous
function of the nuclear coordinates. For SwiG discretization, it is evident from Fig. 5(c) that this
is indeed the case.
    Analytic gradients of SwiG-PCMs are greatly simplified relative to those of the corresponding
gepol-discretized models. 18 SwiG-PCM potential energy surfaces are provably continuous and
differentiable, 18,192 and are free of the unwanted oscillations that plague the FixPVA approach
(see Fig. 5). 18,20 SwiG discretization is well-behaved enough to be used for ab initio molecular
dynamics simulations involving bond-breaking, as shown in Fig. 6 for intramolecular proton transfer
in glycine. SwiG-PCM provides forces that are stable enough to afford good energy conservation
despite the significant deformation of the solute cavity as it transforms between two tautomeric
forms of glycine. This is demonstrated by the energy profile in Fig. 6(b), which provides a closeup
view of ≈ 250 fs of dynamics during which a bond-breaking event occurs. On the other hand, it
appears that SwiG discretization exacerbates differences between the X = DAS and X = SAD†
forms of Kε [Eq. (3.3)], at least in comparison to gepol results where these differences are small. 153
This is not a major problem insofar as the X = DAS form provides correct formal properties and
good numerical agreement with Poisson’s equation, as demonstrated in Fig. 3.
    The SwiG implementation of PCMs first appeared in the Q-Chem program 203 and related
discretization schemes have since been adopted in other software. 204,205 Other discretization ap-
proaches have been described 206–209 but it is unclear that they have been formulated with gradients
in mind. Given the simplicity and success of the SwiG approach, it is also unclear what is to be
gained from these formulations.

                                                                        21
                      (a)
                                                                                                         (b)
                                                                                                     0

                                                                                                   –10




                                                                                Gelst (kcal/mol)
                                                                                                   –20

                             –10                                                                   –30




          Gelst (kcal/mol)
                             –20
                                                                                                   –40
                             –30
                             –40                                                                   –50
                             –50
                                                                                                   –60
                             –60
                             –70                                                                   –70
                                0   1000     2000     3000        4000   5000                        2350      2400    2450     2500    2550   2600
                                           number of time steps                                                       number of time steps


Fig. 6: (a) Electrostatic solvation energy along an ab initio molecular dynamics trajectory of
glycine (PBE0/6-31+G* level) in implicit water (SwiG/C-PCM). The simulation starts at t = 0
from the amino acid tautomer (energy data in orange), which is the most stable form of gas-phase
glycine, but this species spontaneously transfers a proton to form the zwitterionic tautomer (energy
data in blue), during the time window highlighted in the gray box and shown in detail in (b). The
time step is 0.97 fs. (b) Close-up view of Gelst in the region where the proton transfer occurs.
Energy fluctuations are smooth despite the bond-breaking even that occurs around 2.3 ps. Data
are from Ref. 18.

3.3   Isodensity and self-consistent cavity surfaces
Smooth SwiG-PCM discretization schemes been developed for both vdW cavities 18 (including the
SAS) and for the “molecular surface” or SES, 21 thus providing a solution to the practical prob-
lem of discontinuities in potential energy surfaces. Unfortunately, these methods do not alter an
arguably more fundamental problem, namely, that construction of the solute cavity remains a non-
trivial source of arbitrariness in both PCMs and in biomolecular Poisson-Boltzmann electrostatics
calculations. Solvation energies 119 and other properties 210 can be quite sensitive to the particular
atomic radii that are used, and often the atomic radii that work well for small-molecule solvation
energies do not work well for proteins. 211
    Both the vdW and SAS cavity constructions consist of atom-centered spheres with radii

                                                             RA = αRvdW,A + Rprobe .                                                                  (3.7)

The atomic vdW radii {RvdW,A } might be taken from crystal structure data (e.g., Bondi’s radii set
of radii and its subsequent extensions), 114–116 or might simply be parameters of the model. 113 For
vdW cavities, Rprobe = 0 and a typical scaling factor is α = 1.2, 9 whereas one generally does not
scale the vdW radii for SAS cavities. (As discussed in Ref. 9, the choice α = 1.2 does not result
from any kind of elaborate fitting procedure and is intended only as a rough guide; common choices
range from α = 1.1–1.4.) As an example of just how sensitive Gelst is to cavity construction, Table 3
reports calculations for the two tautomers of glycine from Fig. 6, using various cavity definitions. A
change from α = 1.2 to either α = 1.1 or α = 1.3 results in changes of anywhere from 3–9 kcal/mol
in Gelst .
    When the solute is described using electronic structure theory, a more satisfying cavity definition
uses the solute’s own electron density. 96,128–130 It is possible to settle on a numerical isocontour
value (generally ρ0 ∼ 0.001 a.u.) that appears to have some universal validity, 125,210 and results
using ρ0 = 0.001 a.u. are shown in Table 3. It is noteworthy that the standard vdW scaling factor
α = 1.2 affords the best agreement with the isodensity result for both tautomers of glycine, despite

                                                                           22
Table 3: Aqueous solvation energies computed with the SS(V)PE model for two tautomers of
glycine using atomic radii in Eq. (3.7). Electronic structure calculations were performed at the
B3LYP/6-31+G* level.
                       Cavity        α Rprobe          Gelst (kcal/mol)
                                          (Å)    amino acid zwitterion
                       vdWa         1.0    0.0      −26.1         −68.2
                       vdWa         1.1    0.0      −20.2         −56.0
                       vdW   a      1.2    0.0      −16.1         −46.8
                       vdWa         1.3    0.0      −12.9         −39.0
                       vdWa         1.4    0.0      −10.6         −32.6
                       SAS  a       1.0    0.2      −18.0         −51.4
                       SASa         1.0    1.4       −4.3         −13.9
                       isodensity b                 −16.4         −48.1
                       a
                         Using RvdW = 1.10 Å (H), 1.70 Å (C), 1.55 Å (N), and 1.52 Å
                       (O), discretized using SwiG with 302 points per atom. b Using
                       an isocontour ρ0 = 0.001 a.u. and 1,202 grid points.


their very different solvation energies. It is also noteworthy that the two SAS cavities in Table 3,
using values of Rprobe that are common in biomolecular Poisson-Boltzmann calculations, 119 afford
very different solvation energies. The probe radius Rprobe = 1.4 Å is a realistic measure of the size
of a water molecule (based on radial distribution functions for liquid water), 118 but affords rather
small values of Gelst . In contrast, Rprobe = 0.2 Å is much too small to represent an actual water
molecule but affords solvation energies much closer to values obtained using the isodensity and
canonical vdW surface definitions. Values Rprobe = 0.2–0.3 Å are consistent with typical solvent
probe radii used since the early days of continuum solvation models in quantum chemistry. 3–5
    Although the isodensity cavity construction is an appealing choice on physical grounds, ex-
isting algorithms to compute this surface are subject to occasional failure for certain molecular
geometries. 129,130 In principle, these difficulties could likely be overcome using an implementation
based on the “marching cubes” algorithm that is well known in computer graphics. 212,213 A more
fundamental problem is that for an isodensity cavity the surface normal vector ns , which is needed
to define the ASC-PCM double-layer operator D̂, depends on the density: 96,128,129
                                                      ˆ
                                                      ∇ρ(s)
                                            ns = −           .                                   (3.8)
                                                      ˆ
                                                     k∇ρ(s)k

The surface area associated with the discretization point si inherits a density dependence as well,
and this significantly complicates the formulation of analytic energy gradients. To date, these
have never been published for the combination of PCM (or related models) with an isodensity
cavity construction. This limitation could be overcome using an analytically-differentiable pseudo-
density, as has sometimes been used in biomolecular electrostatics calculations, 19,214 perhaps using
a superposition of frozen atomic densities. Although this might remove some arbitrariness from
the selection of atomic radii, however, it would not represent a self-consistent determination of the
cavity surface that could deform to reflect changes in the molecular electronic structure. Conversely,
a pseudo-density that is determined in order to reproduce the molecular electrostatic potential ϕρ (r)
may afford better solvation energies as compared to vdW radii that do not respond to the electronic
structure, 215 but reintroduces the problem of how to compute the analytic gradient. As such, it
is unclear whether such constructions offer advantages over the simplicity of the vdW cavity. As

                                                      23
a simpler workaround, united-atom radii (in which hydrogen atoms are not given atomic spheres)
have been parameterized in an effort to reproduce results obtained with an isodensity cavity. 126
    Within the context of solving Poisson’s equation in three-dimensional space, this idea has more
merit, as one can define “soft” atomic spheres that interpolate the permittivity ε(r) between limiting
values inside (ε = 1) and outside (ε = εs ) of the cavity. 216 Related to this, and offering a more
compelling scheme for self-consistent determination of the solute/continuum interface, is a scheme
that takes ε(r) to be a functional of the solute’s charge density, ε[ρ](r), with limiting values ε = 1
near the nuclei and ε = εs farther away. In practice, “near” and “far” are determined not by distance
but by comparison of ρ(r) to a pair of parameters ρmax and ρmin , the latter of which establishes what
constitutes the “tail” of the density. This idea was originally developed by Fattebert and Gygi 217–219
then later refined by others; 220–223 see Ref. 24 for a review. In its modern incarnation, 221 it uses
a permittivity functional
                                      
                                      1 
                                      
                                                      
                                                          ρ(r) > ρmax
                            ε[ρ](r) = exp t(ln ρ(r)) ρmin < ρ(r) < ρmax                           (3.9)
                                      
                                      
                                        εs                ρ(r) < ρmin

in which t(x) is a switching function that interpolates smoothly between values t(ln ρmin ) = ln εs
and t(ln ρmax ) = 0, so that ε(r) achieves the limits indicated in Eq. (3.9). Inserting this ansatz into
Poisson’s equation [Eq. (2.3)] affords a model in which the dielectric interface is smooth, rather
than sharp as it is in PCMs, yet one where the definition of the interface is updated self-consistently
as the density ρ(r) is iterated to convergence. For that reason, this approach has been called simply
the self-consistent continuum solvation (SCCS) model. 24 The dependence of εs (r) on the density
does mean that the Fock operator δG/δρ acquires an extra term relative to what was discussed in
Section 2.1, namely 221                                             
                                                1 ˆ        2   δε[ρ]
                                 υε [ρ](r) = −    ∇ϕ(r)                .                          (3.10)
                                               8π              δρ(r)
The SCCS model is increasingly being used in ab initio simulations of materials, e.g., to model
the aqueous electrolyte/solid-state interfaces relevant in electrochemistry. 24,71,223–230 Some of that
work points to limitations of the linear dielectric model itself (i.e., the assumption that P ∝ E),
because the rotational response of the water molecules saturates at the electrode interface and
consequently the susceptibility is smaller than in bulk water. 227,228 Limitations in the linearized
Poisson-Boltzmann description of electrolyte effects have also been demonstrated. 226–228

3.4   Linear-scaling algorithms
As noted above, the electrostatic solvation energy obtained from IEF-PCM should be exactly equiv-
alent to that obtained by solving Poisson’s equation, in the case of a classical solute for which there
is no outlying charge. (This equivalence holds only up to discretization errors, but those are
controllable and can be driven to zero if systematically-improvable grids are employed.) It is there-
fore surprising that the PCM formulation of the classical continuum problem has seen very little
use in biomolecular electrostatics calculations. Such calculations are almost always performed in
water, meaning that the simpler C-PCM should be essentially exact, and modifications have been
proposed to treat the linearized Poisson-Boltzmann problem, 68,155,156,164 including modifications to
simulate an ion exclusion layer. 68 The Poisson-Boltzmann equation in three dimensions [Eq. (2.12)]
is typically solved using a finite-difference scheme for the Laplacian operator, 39,231 and this poses
problems for molecular dynamics simulations with implicit solvent, because the forces need not be


                                                  24
                                 (a)                                                                                   (b)                                                                       (c)
                        180                                          1.0                                         50                                                                         90
                                                                                                                                                                (Ala)4000
                        160                  (Ala)250                                                                        CG-FMM                                                         80           CG-FMM
                                                                     0.9                                         45                                             192 cores




                                                                           parallel efficiency
                        140                  wall time, CG-FMM                                                                                                                              70           ddCOSMO
                                                                                                                         (Ala)1000



                                                                                                 wall time (s)
                                                                     0.8                                         40



        wall time (s)                                                                                                                                                       wall time (s)
                        120                  parallel efficiency                                                         48 cores                                                           60
                        100                                          0.7                                         35                           (Ala)2000                                     50
                                                                                                                                              96 cores                                                 (Ala)1000
                        80                                           0.6                                         30                                                                         40
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (Ala)4000
                        60                                                                                                                                                                  30
                                                                     0.5                                         25          (Ala)500, 24 cores
                        40                                                                                                                                                                  20                         (Ala)2000
                        20                                           0.4                                         20      (Ala)250, 12 cores                                                 10
                         0                                           0.3                                         15                                                                         0
                             0         50     100       150        200                                             0         1       2        3     4       5        6                       0     5      10   15 20     25   30      35   40
                                       no. of processors                                                                         no. of grid points / 106                                                 no. of atoms / 1000



Fig. 7: Timings and parallel scalability data for linear-scaling PCM solvers applied to polyalanine
helices, using a classical force field description of the solute. (a) Strong-scaling data for a CG-FMM
algorithm applied to (Ala)250 , running on 12 shared-memory cores per node. (b) Weak-scaling data
for (Ala)n helices of increasing length, versus the number of Lebedev grid points used to discretize
the cavity surface. (c) Comparison of timing data for CG-FMM versus ddCOSMO for (Ala)n . The
CG-FMM data in (c) are the same as those in (b), but all ddCOSMO calculations were run on a
single 12-core node. Data in (a) and (b) are from Ref. 19 and ddCOSMO data in (c) are from Ref.
165.

continuous when discretized in this way. Although significant effort has gone into obtaining high-
quality forces, 161–163,232–236 from a certain point of view this looks like engineering an elaborate
means of escape from the very deep hole created by a numerical framework that admits discontinu-
ities. A better strategy is not to get trapped in that hole in the first place. The SwiG discretization
procedure for PCMs (Section 3.2) was designed as a starting point that is free of discontinuities.
     All of this suggests that SwiG-PCMs could make very attractive replacements for the finite-
difference Poisson-Boltzmann solvers that are commonplace in biomolecular electrostatics calcula-
tions. Efforts to do so will quickly run up against the size of the PCM matrix equation, which
is equal to the number of discretization grid points, itself proportional to the number of solvent-
exposed atoms. This means that a straightforward solution of Eq. (3.2), based on constructing
K−1                                                     3                                        2
   ε Yε or its equivalent, incurs a CPU cost of O(Natoms ) and a memory footprint of O(Natoms ),
albeit with significant prefactors in both cases that reflect the number of discretization points per
atom. In QM/MM calculations with continuum boundary conditions, it is the size of the MM
region that dictates the matrix dimension and for small QM regions with large MM environments,
one can easily encounter scenarios wherein the cost of classical electrostatics (PCM part of the
calculation) exceeds the cost of doing the quantum mechanics! 19
     A straightforward solution to that problem is to introduce iterative solvers that do not require
storage or inversion of the matrix Kε , 19,237,238 such as conjugate gradient (CG) or biconjugate
gradient algorithms. 19 The bottleneck in these methods is computing the Coulomb interactions
between surface discretization points, and this can be accelerated using the fast multipole method
(FMM), 238 in either its original formulation or using a simpler tree-code approach. 19,141 Paral-
lelization strategies have also been discussed. 19 Data for polyalanine helices (Fig. 7) show that wall
times for iterative solution of the PCM equation (to obtain surface charges) can be reduced to a few
seconds, even for (Ala)4000 with 5.6 × 106 surface discretization points. Proof-of-concept MM/PCM
molecular dynamics simulations have been reported in which the atomistic MM region consists of
a segment of DNA bound to a histone (21,734 classical atoms from a force field), with ≈124,000
point charges used to discretize the surface. 19
     An alternative algorithm for fast iterative solution of the PCM equation is based on a domain
decomposition procedure. 165–167,239–241 Here, the solute cavity is divided into overlapping domains,


                                                                                                                                      25
Table 4: Mean unsigned errors (MUEs) for aqueous hydration energies (∆hyd G ◦ ), using continuum
solvation models, for small molecules in the Minnesota Solvation Database. 246–249 Estimated un-
certainties in the experimental data are ±0.2 kcal/mol for neutral solutes 246,247 and ±3 kcal/mol
for ions. 247
        Data       Ndata                          MUE (kcal/mol)
        Set                                       PCM-based              Poisson-based
                          IEF-PCMa SM12b SMDc CMIRSd                  SCCSe soft-spheref
        neutrals     274      5.7        0.7     0.8       0.8          1.1          1.1
        cations       52     12.7        3.5     3.2       1.8          2.3          2.1
        anions        60      8.0        3.8     6.2       2.8          5.5          3.0
        all ions     112      9.7        3.7     4.7       2.4          4.0          2.6
      a
        B3LYP/6-31G* level using united-atom radii, 126 from Ref. 244. b B3LYP/6-31G* level using ChElPG
      charges, from Ref. 248, c mPW1PW/6-31G* level, from Ref. 250, d B3LYP/6-31G* level using isodensity
      cavity with ρ0 = 0.001 a.u., from Ref. 251. e PBE in a plane-wave basis, from Ref. 252. f PBE in a
      wavelet basis, from Ref. 216.


each consisting of a single atomic sphere, for which the PCM equation can be solved analytically.
These single-sphere solutions form the basis for an iterative solution of the PCM equation for the full
domain, which can be formulated as sparse matrix equations that can be solved in O(Natoms ) time.
This method was originally developed for C-PCM and is thus named “ddCOSMO”, 165–167,239,240
although it has now been extended to arbitrary PCMs (“ddPCM”). 241 Timing data on just a single
compute node [Fig. 7(c)] show that the method is competitive with a parallel CG-FMM solver. The
ddCOSMO algorithm has been implemented for MM/PCM molecular dynamics in the Tinker-HP
code, 242 using a switching function is used to guarantee smooth forces. 243 Such an approach seems
like a practical replacement for finite-difference Poisson-Boltzmann solvers that is inherently free
of problems with discontinuous forces.


4    Solvation Energies
Perhaps the single most important property afforded by a solvation model is the free energy of
solvation, ∆solv G. Using a solvation model to compute ∆solv G ◦ for the reactant and product species
in a chemical reaction, combined with a gas-phase calculation of the reaction energy ∆rxn U and
free energy                                                            
                                   ◦                         Zproducts
                             ∆rxn G [gas] = ∆rxn U − RT ln                ,                     (4.1)
                                                             Zreactants
where Z represents the partition function, one may obtain a value for the solution-phase reaction
energy, ∆rxn G ◦ [solv]. This procedure is illustrated by the thermodynamic cycle shown in Fig. 8.
However, the continuum electrostatics problem discussed heretofore defines only the electrostatic
contribution to ∆solv G ◦ , and this is generally insufficient to predict accurate solvation energies. This
point is demonstrated vividly by statistical errors in IEF-PCM solvation energies, 244 summarized
for aqueous solutes in Table 4. Errors with respect to experimental solvation energies average
about 6 kcal/mol for charge-neutral solutes, 8 kcal/mol for anions, and 13 kcal/mol for cations,
despite much smaller errors with respect to exact Poisson electrostatics (see Table 1). In nonaqueous
solvents, IEF-PCM errors with respect to experimental values of ∆solv G ◦ are 4.9 kcal/mol for neutral
solutes and 12.4 kcal/mol for ions. 244 Similarly poor results confirmed using other electrostatics-
only PCM approaches including C- and D-PCM. 220,245


                                                      26
                                                ∆ rxnGº[gas]
                                  A      B                       C
                                              A(g)+B(g)   C(g)


                         ∆ solvGº[A+B]                               –∆ solvGº[C]


                                                 ∆ rxnGº[solv]
                                          B
                                  A                              C




Fig. 8: Thermodynamic cycle connecting gas- and solution-phase reaction energies for A + B → C.
The gas-phase value of ∆rxn G ◦ contains the vibrational entropy change in addition to the reaction
enthalpy, and a continuum solvation model is used to compute ∆solv G ◦ for each reactant and product
species. This completes the thermodynamic cycle to compute the solution-phase value of ∆rxn G ◦ .
Changes in shape signify that geometries of A, B, and C may be different in solution than they are
in the gas phase, in which case the solvation energies ∆solv G ◦ should include a term representing
the gas-phase deformation energy.


    To do better, these electrostatic solvation models must be augmented to include nonelectrostatic
interactions (Gnonelst ), 253 a catch-all term that includes

   • cavitation, meaning the energy required to carve out a space in the continuum solvent;

   • Pauli repulsion, i.e., short-range repulsive interactions with the solvent molecules;

   • dispersion, which is non-specific but attractive, and finally

   • hydrogen-bonding between solute and solvent.

Harder-to-define entropic changes to the solvent make a contribution to ∆solv G ◦ as well, 244 although
this effect could be classified as part of the cavitation (free) energy. Indeed, the phenomena on the
list above are not wholly independent, e.g., short-range repulsion is also related to cavitation, and
hydrogen bonding has contributions from electrostatics, repulsion, and dispersion. In protic sol-
vents, and for solutes where hydrogen bonding is important, one or more explicit solvent molecules
could be included as part of the atomistic solute, thereby removing the largest part of the last item
on the list. Semicontinuum or “cluster + continuum” approaches of this kind are common, e.g., for
calculating hydration energies of ions. 8,254 An important special case is pKa calculations, 8,255–257
corresponding to the ionization reaction

                                      HA(aq) → H+ (aq) + A− (aq) .                                (4.2)

Even with one or more explicit solvent molecules to capture hydrogen bonding, however, the remain-
ing contributions to Gnonelst must be added to the electrostatic model in order to obtain accurate
reaction energetics. It has occasionally been noted that semicontinuum predictions of hydration
energies ∆hyd G ◦ may fail to converge as the number of explicit water molecules is increased. 258–261
In truth, there is no reason why such a calculation should converge to ∆hyd G ◦ , at least in the
absence of sampling over the explicit water molecules, because such an approach treats entropic
contributions in an unbalanced way.

                                                     27
    Nonelectrostatic models appropriate for use with PCMs have been developed over the years
on an ad hoc basis. 9,13 These have often appeared under the name of “Miertuš-Scrocco-Tomasi”
solvation model, 98,253,262,263 a term that in practice means a PCM used in conjunction with a SASA-
type parameterization of Gnonelst along the lines of what is discussed in Section 4.1. These models
have retained something of a do-it-yourself aesthetic and have not been packaged into “canned”
or “black-box” solvation models, a fact that has occasionally led to hard feelings when errors in
IEF-PCM solvation energies (such as those in Table 4) are pointed out. 253,264 Section 4.1 examines
one particular class of black-box solvation model, namely, the SMx models developed by Cramer,
Truhlar, and co-workers. 244,247–250,265,266 An even blacker-box approach is “COSMO-RS”, 267,268
which is an extension of the COSMO method 168 designed for “real solvents”. The formulation
and parameters of COSMO-RS are proprietary, however, so the black box cannot be opened and
this method’s performance cannot be independently implemented, verified, or tested. As such,
COSMO-RS is not discussed any further.

4.1   SMx and SASA-based models
For computing free energies of solvation, the most successful and popular models within the
quantum chemistry community are the “SMx” models. 244 These have version numbers through
x = 12, 248 and later x = D (for “density”). 249 Only the most recent versions (SM12 and SMD) are
included in Table 4.
    To understand how these models work, we first take a step back to discuss implicit solvation
in classical biomolecular simulations. Owing in no small part to difficulties in obtaining stable nu-
merical forces for Poisson-Boltzmann electrostatics, 161–163,236 as discussed in Section 3.4, the most
popular implicit solvation models in that context are not based directly on solution of the Poisson-
Boltzmann equation but instead are methods known as generalized Born (GB) models, 269,270 whose
name is a nod to the Born ion formula of Eq. (2.17). GB models use the Born model as a pairwise
ansatz to compute the total electrostatic solvation energy according to
                                                           atoms
                               GB      1         1   1        X      QA QB
                              Gelst =−             −                       .                     (4.3)
                                        2       εin εout              fAB
                                                            A,B>A

This expression allows for the possibility of a dielectric constant εin that is different from unity
                                            −1
inside of the solute cavity. The quantity fAB   in Eq. (4.3) is a parameterized, effective Coulomb
potential, the canonical example of which is 269–271
                               2                   2
                                                                 1/2
                         fAB = RAB + R̄A R̄B exp − RAB /4R̄A R̄B       .                         (4.4)

Here, RAB = RA − RB is the interatomic distance and the quantity Q2A /fAA is the Coulomb
self-energy in the Born ion model, with an effective cavity radius fAA ≡ R̄A . As such, the quantities
{R̄A } are a set of effective radii that measure the “electrostatic size” of each atom in the molecule
+ continuum environment. 272–274 For a classical solute, in which ρ(r) is a collection of atom-
centered point charges {QA }, these radii can be computed exactly by solving either Poisson’s
equation, 273 or else its PCM analogue, 275 once per atomic charge QA , in a cavity representing the
entire molecule. This procedure effectively forces the pairwise GB ansatz in Eq. (4.3) to reproduce
the exact electrostatic energy defined by the continuum electrostatics problem, and these values of
R̄A have been called the “perfect” Born radii. 270,273 The procedure just described is not a practical
way to determine R̄A but can be useful to generate data sets that may suggest new analytical forms
for GB models. 19,275–278


                                                    28
   In practice, the radii {R̄K } are typically determined using various surface integration proce-
dures. 274 The most popular of these is 269,270,272,274
                                            Z                             !−1
                               1      1             θ kr − RK k − RvdW,K
                   R̄K =           +                                      dr   .                 (4.5)
                            RvdW,K   4π         r∈Ω       kr − RK k4

Here, θ is a step function with θ(x) = 1 for x > 0 and θ(x) = 0 for x ≤ 0; this limits the in-
tegration domain to the region of the solute cavity (r ∈ Ω) that lies outside of the vdW sphere
for atom K. The expression for R̄K in Eq. (4.5) comes from the so-called Coulomb-field approx-
imation, 269,270,272 a charge-in-a-sphere model for the reaction-field potential. This is thought to
overestimate electrostatic size, especially for charges close to the cavity surface, and alternatives
have been developed, 270,274 but Eq. (4.5) is the form used in the SMx models that are described
below. The requisite integral can be evaluated numerically using concentric atomic radical shells, 279
                                                                                      GB /dx, is com-
but its gradient with respect to nuclear displacements, which is needed to obtain dGelst
plicated when defined in terms of the solid geometry of interpenetrating vdW spheres. 190 Both the
integral in Eq. (4.5) and its gradient would be straightforward to evaluate using SwiG discretization;
see Fig. 5(b).
    The GB ansatz in Eq. (4.3) specifies only the electrostatic component of the solvation energy.
The model is completed by adding a nonelectrostatic term Gnonelst , for which two forms are common.
The simpler of the two consists of a term proportional to the volume of the solute cavity, to model
the cavitation energy, and another term proportional to the SASA, which serves to model dispersion:

                                   Gnonelst = βVcavity + γ × (SASA) .                            (4.6)

The quantities β and γ are empirical parameters. An alternative form that is also widely used is
                                                atoms
                                                 X
                                   Gnonelst =           γK × SASA(K) ,                           (4.7)
                                                 K

where SASA(K) is the solvent-exposed surface area of atom K and the parameter {γK } have units of
surface tension. Note that there is no volumetric term in Eq. (4.7). It has been argued, based on the
scaled-particle theory of hard-sphere fluids, 280 that for small molecules the cavitation energy ought
to be parametrizable in terms of the solvent-exposed surface area, 98,149,281,282 although the form
in Eq. (4.7) has been used for macromolecules as well. 283 Models that combine GB electrostatics
[Eq. (4.3)] with force-field charges to represent the solute, using either Eq. (4.6) or Eq. (4.7) for
Gnonelst , are known as “MM/GBSA” methods. 284–292 There is an analogous set of “MM/PBSA”
methods that substitute Poisson-Boltzmann electrostatics in place of the GB model. 284–293 The
MM/GBSA method is the most widely-used implicit solvation model in biomolecular simulation, 270
but both approaches are popular in drug-discovery applications, e.g., for calculating ligand–protein
binding affinities. 293–296 In that context, these methods are often used as low-resolution screening
tools representing a level of sophistication that is intermediate between “knowledge-based” (but
largely physics-free) docking or scoring-function procedures, and much more expensive atomistic
free energy simulations in explicit solvent.
    In quantum chemistry contexts, it is not uncommon to use different definitions of the cavity
surface for the electrostatic and nonelectrostatic interactions. Models for Gnonelst introduced above
suggest a SAS cavity but numerical results for Gelst in Table 3 suggest that atomic radii R = 1.2RvdW
correspond more closely to isodensity results as compared to SAS radii (R = RvdW + Rprobe ), at
least when Rprobe corresponds to a realistic estimate of the size of a solvent molecule. The SMx


                                                        29
models, 244 which are the most popular methods for predicting ∆solv G in quantum chemistry cal-
culations, exemplify this distinction. The SM8 265 and SM12 248 variants, for example, employ GB
electrostatics based on radii obtained from Eq. (4.5), along with atom-centered charges derived from
the quantum-mechanical charge density by means of certain charge models, CMx. 247,297–300 The lat-
ter are empirically-parameterized improvements upon standard atomic partial charge prescriptions
(Mulliken, Hirshfeld, etc.), with additional parameters designed to improve the dipole moments
obtained from the partial charges, since Mulliken and Hirshfeld charges known to do a poor job
of reproducing the dipole moment corresponding to the SCF charge density from which they were
obtained. 301 CMx charges inherit the basis-set sensitivity of the underlying wave function-derived
charges, therefore the SMx models through SM12 are each parameterized for use with particular
(small) basis sets, e.g. 6-31G*. The SMD model 249 was introduced to overcome this limitation, by
substituting IEF-PCM electrostatics in place of a GB model, with the result that SMD can be used
with arbitrary basis sets whereas other SMx models should only be used in conjunction with the
basis sets for which they were parameterized.
    The SMx models are completed by adding a nonelectrostatic term of the form in Eq. (4.7).
Atomic “surface-tension” parameters {γK } are themselves empirically-fitted functions of certain
“solvent descriptors”, which include the surface tension of the solvent itself, its refractive index
(which is related to polarizability), and certain Lewis acidity parameters. 302 The result is a “uni-
versal” model, 244 in the sense that once the fitting procedure is completed, parameters {γK } are
available for any solvent for which the various solvent descriptors are known. The SM8 model
additionally parameterizes Gnonelst as a function of temperature. 303,304
    Error statistics for small-molecule hydration free energies (∆hyd G ◦ ), obtained using SM12 and
SMD, are listed in Table 4. (The SM8 model has slightly larger errors for ions; see Ref. 244.) The
comparison between IEF-PCM and SMD is especially revealing because these two approaches use
the same approach for Gelst : IEF-PCM is just SMD without Gnonelst . Evidently, the nonelectrostatic
contribution dramatically reduces errors in ∆hyd G ◦ for both cations and for charge-neutral solutes.
Errors for anions are reduced as well although the impact of Gnonelst is more muted in that case,
which may simply reflect the difficulty of the anion solvation problem. In any case, it is clear
that nonelectrostatic interactions must be included to obtain accurate solvation energies. For
properties that depend on only a single geometry (e.g., for some spectroscopic applications), the
nonelectrostatic contributions may be less important but to compute a reaction profile—reactant,
product, and transition state energies in solution—one might worry that changes in geometry along
the reaction coordinate could affect the nonelectrostatic contribution differently for the various
chemical species involved.
    Error statistics for solvents other than water are on par with results for aqueous solutes, e.g.,
mean unsigned errors (MUEs) of 0.6 kcal/mol for neutral solutes and 4.5 kcal/mol for ions, in the
case of SM12, 248 versus 0.7 kcal/mol for neutrals and 4.2 kcal/mol for ions using SMD. 249 Predic-
tion of ∆solv G ◦ in nonaqueous solvents is necessary in order to predict partition coefficients between
different solvents. In particular, the octanol/water partition coefficient (equilibrium constant Kow )
is a common measure of lipophilicity (or conversely, hydrophobicity), 305–307 and is related to sol-
vation energies according to

                         ∆solv G ◦ [octanol] − ∆solv G ◦ [water] = −RT ln Kow .                    (4.8)

The value of Kow is widely used in drug-discovery applications, 307–309 and atomic decomposition of
terms contributing to ∆∆G ◦ in Eq. (4.8) has been used to determine similarity indices for predicting
quantitative structure–activity relationships. 307 For environmental toxicology purposes, Kow is an
important physical parameter to determine for any new compound. 310 The octanol/water partition


                                                  30
