                                          New Laplace and Helmholtz solvers
                                          Abinand Gopal and Lloyd N. Trefethen
                                          Mathematical Institute, University of Oxford, Oxford OX2 6GG, UK
                                          gopal@maths.ox.ac.uk and trefethen@maths.ox.ac.uk




arXiv:1902.00374v1 [math.NA] 1 Feb 2019
                                          Abstract. New numerical algorithms based on rational functions are introduced that
                                          can solve certain Laplace and Helmholtz problems on two-dimensional domains with
                                          corners faster and more accurately than the standard methods of finite elements and
                                          integral equations. The new algorithms point to a reconsideration of the assumptions
                                          underlying existing numerical analysis for partial differential equations.



                                          1. Laplace equation
                                              The Laplace and Helmholtz equations are the basic partial differential equations
                                          (PDEs) of potential theory and acoustics, respectively [1]. Suppose a region Ω bounded
                                          by a polygon P is given and (to begin with the Laplace case) we seek the unique function
                                          u(x, y) that satisfies ∆u = ∂ 2 u/∂x2 + ∂ 2 u/∂y 2 = 0 in Ω and matches a given function
                                          h at the boundary. More generally, P might have curved sides meeting at corners, and
                                          the boundary data might involve derivatives as well as function values. It is convenient
                                          to represent the coordinates by a complex variable z = x + iy, so we write the boundary
                                          condition as u(z) = h(z) for z ∈ P .
                                              The standard techniques for solving such a problem numerically are the finite el-
                                          ement method (FEM) [2] and boundary integral equations [3]. Yet these methods
                                          face a challenge in calculating accurate solutions because of singularities at the cor-
                                          ners [4]. The mathematical basis of a new algorithm for meeting this challenge is a
                                          theorem in the field of approximation theory published by Donald Newman in 1964
                                          [5]. Newman considered the problem of approximation of f (x) = |x| on the interval
                                          [−1, 1] by a rational function, that is, a quotient of polynomials r(z) = p(z)/q(z). He
                                          showed that whereas polynomial approximations converge at best at the very slow rate
                                          kf − pn k = O(n−1 ), rational approximations can achieve much faster “root-exponential”
                                                                               √
                                          convergence kf − rn k = O(exp(−C n)) with C > 0 [6,7]. Here n is the degree of a
                                          polynomial or rational function, which is defined in the latter case as the maximum of
                                          the degrees of p and q.
                                              Our new algorithm achieves root-exponential convergence for solving PDEs by ap-
                                          proximating u(z) by the real part of a rational function, u(z) = Re r(z). Any such
                                          approximation is a harmonic function in Ω, i.e., a solution of the Laplace equation, pro-
                                          vided r has no poles in Ω. Finding rational approximations to given data is a difficult
                                          nonlinear problem in general [8]. Here, however, we know that the dominant singularities
                                          of the function to be approximated are located at the vertices of P . This suggests the
                                          idea, motivated by Newman’s result and related computational experience [8], of pre-
                                          scribing poles of r outside Ω a priori in a configuration with exponential clustering near
                                          each vertex. Specifically, our rational functions are represented in the partial fraction

                                                                                      1
form
                                            X
                                            N 1
                                                  aj       X
                                                           N 2

                                   r(z) =                +     bj z j ,                     (1)
                                            j=1
                                                z −  z j   j=0

with the poles {zj } fixed and the real and imaginary parts of {aj } and {bj } as unknowns
(N = 2N1 + 2N2 + 1 degrees of freedom in total, since b0 can be taken to be real). One
might expect that the pole locations would have to be delicately chosen to be effective.
However, in a new mathematical result to be published elsewhere, we have proved that
a straightforward realization of this idea, relying on no unknown parameters, is enough
to guarantee the existence of approximations of the form (1) with root-exponential con-
vergence. To find such approximations computationally, one exploits the fact that since
the poles are prescribed, the problem is linear. Expansion coefficients are found by least-
squares fitting in sample points on the boundary, a routine problem of linear algebra
involving a matrix of dimensions about 3N × N . Starting from a small value such as 50,
N is increased systematically until a prescribed accuracy is achieved. In typical problems
on polygons with up to 8 vertices, we find that N ≈ 1000 suffices to give accuracy to 8
digits, complete with an accuracy guarantee derived from the maximum principle, which
asserts that the error at each point in the interior is bounded by the maximal error on
the boundary.


                                                                          4
                              1
                                                                          3.5

                                                                          3
                            0.5
                                                                          2.5

                              0                                           2

                                                                          1.5
                            -0.5
                                                                          1

                                                                          0.5
                              -1
                                                                          0
                                   -1   -0.5      0       0.5   1


Fig. 1. Laplace equation in an L-shaped region. Poles are clustered exponentially near
each vertex, and then a least-squares problem is solved on the boundary P to find expansion
coefficients for a global representation (1) of a solution accurate to 10 digits. The dot in the
interior of the domain marks the expansion point of the polynomial part of (1).

    Figure 1 shows the solution computed by the new Laplace equation algorithm in an
L-shaped region, a famous test geometry for problems of this kind [10]. For a problem
that is generic in the sense of having singularities at the corners, the simplest choice
of boundary data is u(z) = h(z) = [Rez]2 = x2 . Our code approximates the solution
successively with N = 42, 82, 138, . . . , 1002 degrees of freedom, at which
                                                                          √ point 10-digit
accuracy is achieved. Figure 2 shows the accuracy as a function of N , revealing a
straight line corresponding to root-exponential convergence. For a wide range of Laplace
problems on polygons, this performance is representative. Typically we solve a problem
in < 1s on a laptop running MATLAB in 16-digit floating-point arithmetic, and then


                                                      2
                                   10 0



                                  10 -4

                         error
                                  10 -8



                                 10 -12
                                          0   10       20    30



Fig. 2. Convergence. The maximal error as a function of number of degrees of freedom N
for the problem of Fig. 1 shows root-exponential convergence. Similar convergence is observed
for other domains with corners.


each evaluation of the solution, with guaranteed accuracy all the way to the corners,
takes a few tens of µs. For the problem of Fig. 1, the evaluation of u to 10-digit accuracy
at 104 points in Ω takes 0.3s.

2. Comparison with other methods
    The numerical solution of PDEs has been at the heart of scientific computing since
the 1950s, and the Laplace equation in a planar domain is as fundamental a problem in
this area as any. There are two main classes of methods for solving such problems: the
finite element method (FEM), and boundary integral equations. To gather information
on how the new approach compares with these, in November 2018 we posed the L-domain
problem just presented as a challenge to the international numerical analysis community
via the email list NA Digest [11]. Specifically, we asked for a computation of u(0.99, 0.99)
to 8 digits of accuracy (the exact value is 1.02679192610 . . .). This led to responses
from about twenty experts around the world. As expected, about half the responses
recommended FEM algorithms and software such as FEniCS [12], Firedrake [13], IFISS
[14], and PLTMG [15]. In this approach, the set of functions on Ω is approximated by
a finite dimensional linear space, and then one solves a matrix problem to find a good
candidate in that space. Typically the matrices are large, sparse, and ill-conditioned.
The FEM is noted for its great flexibility, enabling problems much more complicated
than ours to be solved effectively, in three as well as two dimensions. However, it is not
very efficient near singularities, and whereas all our respondents were able to calculate
a solution to 2–4 digits of accuracy, only one came close to 8 digits. For example, one
researcher used 158,997 5th-order triangular finite elements near the reentrant corner
and achieved 6 correct digits. Our assessment is that it is possible to solve the Laplace
equation on a region with corners to high accuracy by the FEM, but this entails a
significant computation requiring a high level of expertise and tools.
   The other well-known methods are boundary integral equations, which are advan-
tageous because of good conditioning and because the solution is represented in one
dimension, along the boundary, rather than two dimensions in the domain [3]. Here one
begins by solving an integral equation to determine a density function ρ(z), such as this


                                                   3
Fredholm equation of the second kind:
                          Z
                                                                          cos(6 (z − ζ, ν(ζ)))
        h(z) = −πρ(z) +      K(z, ζ)ρ(ζ)|dζ|,               K(z, ζ) =                          ,   (2)
                                P                                                |z − ζ|

where 6 (z − ζ, ν(ζ)) is the angle between z − ζ and the inward normal to P at ζ. This is
a “double-layer potential” formulation, in the standard terminology, whose solution ρ(z)
can be interpreted as a distribution of dipole charge density along the boundary. Once
ρ is found, the solution to the Laplace problem is evaluated at a point z by computing
an integral:                            Z
                                      u(z) =         K(z, ζ)ρ(ζ)|dζ|.                              (3)
                                                 P
In general ρ will be smooth along the sides and singular at the corners, introducing
challenges in evaluating the integrals. Additionally, the kernel K is singular, so that even
away from the corners, an accurate evaluation may be a nontrivial task. However, experts
have developed powerful techniques for such quadratures [16], and four respondents to
our inquiry produced results accurate to the specified 8 digits or more. We conclude
that if one wants an accurate solution to Laplace problems in corners, integral equations
are the most effective of the existing technologies. On the other hand, there is not much
software available, and the solutions communicated to us were produced by experts
running their own codes.
    Whereas integral equations make use of a continuous distribution of dipoles ρ(z) on
the boundary, the new rational functions method can be interpreted as using a finite sum
of dipoles (delta functions) beyond the boundary. This has the advantage that evaluation
of u(z) takes exactly the same form (1) regardless of z, requiring no special calculations
when z is near a boundary arc or a corner. One may regard this as a zero-dimensional
representation of the solution, whose complexity is determined only by the complexity
of the function being represented, not by that of the region Ω or its boundary P . The
most closely related existing method goes by the name of the method of fundamental
solutions (MFS), also called the charge simulation method, in which solutions are also
approximated via finite sums [17,18]. The MFS differs from our approach in that each
term is normally a monopole (point charge) rather than a dipole, and it is not normally
applied with exponential clustering to achieve root-exponential convergence [19].

3. Helmholtz equation
   The most important generalization of the Laplace equation is the Helmholtz equation
∆u + k 2 u = 0, which models time-harmonic propagation of acoustic or electromagnetic
waves at frequency k [20]. For a Helmholtz problem in a domain exterior to a scattering
body with wave fields satisfying the Sommerfeld radiation condition, we modify (1) to

         X
         N1                           X
                                      N1
                                                                  z − zj    X
                                                                            N2
                                                                                            zj
               aj H0 (k|z − zj |) +         bj H1 (k|z − zj |)            +    cj Hj (k|z|) j ,    (4)
         j=1                          j=1
                                                                 |z − zj | j=0             |z|

where k is fixed and Hj are Hankel functions of the first kind. We cluster singularities
exponentially near corners in the interior of the scatterer. Interesting problems now
require complex expansion coefficients to cancel a signal incident at the boundary; the

                                                       4
                                                                        1.5
   1.5                                                                                                            0.15

                                                            1
                                                                          1                                       0.1
     1                                                      0.8

                                                            0.6
                                                                        0.5                                       0.05
   0.5                                                      0.4

                                                            0.2
                                                                          0                                       0
     0                                                      0

                                                            -0.2

  -0.5                                                      -0.4       -0.5                                       -0.05


                                                            -0.6

    -1                                                                   -1                                       -0.1
                                                            -0.8

                                                            -1

  -1.5                                                                 -1.5                                       -0.15
     -1.5   -1   -0.5   0   0.5             1         1.5                 -1.5   -1    -0.5   0   0.5   1   1.5




Fig. 3. Helmholtz equation. Analogous computations to Fig. 1 for the Helmholtz equation
∆u + k2 u = 0 with k = 50 in the exterior of a square. The incident signal on the left is a plane
wave oriented at 30◦ , and on the right, a point oscillation H0 (k|z − z0 |) situated at z0 = 1/2 + i.




                                          10 0


                                          10 -2

                                  error
                                          10 -4


                                          10 -6

                                                  0         10          20            30



Fig. 4. Convergence. Root-exponential convergence for the Helmholtz equation, after an
initial k-dependent transient needed to resolve the wave. The quantity measured is the maximum
error on the boundary for the first example of Fig. 3.


“sound soft” case has zero total field at the boundary, and the “sound hard” case has
zero normal derivative. Figure 3 shows two sound soft example problems solved to 4-digit
accuracy [21]. In each case the solution took about 2s on a laptop, with about 250 µs
for each point evaluation afterwards. The convergence rate is again root-exponential, as
shown in Fig. 4.

4. Discussion
    Many issues will need to be addressed as the new methods are developed. One is the
effective choice of exponential clustering parameters and numbers of singularities near
each vertex, which does not matter in a certain theoretical sense but may be important
in practice since poor choices lead to numerical instability. Another is the treatment
of slits and other geometric complications, including the treatment of highly elongated
domains, where it may be important to generalize the N2 sums of (1) and (4) to several
sums centered at different points. For Helmholtz problems with high frequency (k ≫ 1),

                                                                   5
a simple N2 sum may cease to be competitive for the smooth part of the problem with
other established methods. And of course there is the question of extension to the
three space dimensions, where again, existing methods do not always well exploit the
smoothness of most problems away from certain singular points and curves. For the
Laplace equation, this entails a move from the logarithmic potential associated with
rational functions and the plane to the inverse-linear potential of Newtonian mechanics.
In principle, methods with fractional-exponential convergence analogous to the methods
presented here should exist in 3D, but we have no view as to whether they will prove
competitive in practice.
    There is a historical context that may shed light on the lack of previous literature
on solving PDEs by means of rational functions and their generalizations. The mathe-
maticians of the nineteenth century focused on functions that were analytic or piecewise
analytic, i.e., smooth and representable by convergent Taylor series. Most physical ap-
plications are of this kind. In the twentieth century, however, mathematicians turned
to new challenges of less smooth functions, developing advanced tools for analyzing fine
distinctions of regularity (i.e., smoothness). Overwhelmingly, such tools became the
standard framework for computational mathematicians too, and in particular, FEM ex-
perts almost invariably derive and analyze their algorithms in the language of Sobolev
spaces [22], in which precise distinctions are made, for example, between a function with
one derivative of smoothness and a function with one-and-a-half derivatives. This kind of
numerical analysis brings with it a bias towards low-accuracy methods tuned to problems
with limited smoothness. The simplicity and speed of the new methods proposed here
are a reminder that there is also a place for numerical analysis based on less pessimistic
smoothness assumptions.
    This note has introduced a new class of numerical methods for the fast and accurate
solution of certain PDEs. The method captures singularities to high accuracy without
having to analyze them and delivers a global representation of the solution by a single
formula. To assess its prospects, one may divide the scale of PDE problems into small,
medium, and large. For small or “toy” problems such as illustrated here, the new method
appears to be faster than existing methods for high-accuracy solutions (e.g., 5–10 digits).
At the other extreme, for large problems of computational engineering, often in complex
geometries, the new approach would probably be unworkable (and in any case would
require extension to three dimensions). It is the middle range, which one might associate
with computational science more than computational engineering, that will be most
important in the long run. We believe the new approach holds promise for such problems
and that developing it is a challenge for the years ahead. The established methods of
finite elements and integral equations, of course, have benefited from half a century’s
head start.


Acknowledgements. This work was initiated during September 2018 while the au-
thors were visiting New York University. We thank Alex Barnett, Timo Betcke, Leslie
Greengard, Dave Hewett, Yuji Nakatsukasa, Vladimir Rokhlin, Kirill Serkh, and Euan
Spence for their advice.



                                            6
References

[1] R. Courant and D. Hilbert, Methods of Mathematical Physics (Interscience, 1966).
[2] D. Braess, Finite Elements: Theory, Fast Solvers, and Applications in Solid Mechan-
ics (Cambridge U. Press, 2007).
[3] K. Serkh and V. Rokhlin, On the solution of elliptic partial differential equations on
regions with corners, J. Comput. Phys. 305, 150–171 (2016).
[4] W. Wasow, Asymptotic development of the solution of Dirichlet’s problem at analytic
corners, Duke Math. J. 24, 47–56 (1957).
[5] D. J. Newman, Rational approximation to |x|, Mich. Math. J. 11, 11–14 (1964).
[6] H. Stahl, Best uniform rational approximation of |x| on [−1, 1], Russian Acad. Sci.
Sb. Math. 76, 461–487 (1993).
[7] L. N. Trefethen, Approximation Theory and Approximation Practice (SIAM, 2013).
[8] Y. Nakatsukasa, O. Sète, and L. N. Trefethen, The AAA algorithm for rational
approximation, SIAM J. Sci. Comput. 40, A1494–A1522 (2018).
[9] A. Gopal and L. N. Trefethen, Representation of conformal maps by rational functions,
Numer. Math., to appear.
[10] L. Fox, P. Henrici, and C. Moler, Approximations and bounds for eigenvalues of
elliptic operators, SIAM J. Numer. Anal. 4, 89–102 (1967).
[11] L. N. Trefethen, 8-digit Laplace solutions on polygons? Posting on NA Digest at
www.netlib.org/na-digest-html (29 November 2018).
[12] https://fenicsproject.org.
[13] https://www.firedrakeproject.org.
[14] H. C. Elman, A. Ramage, and D. J. Silvester, IFISS: A computational laboratory
for investigating incompressible flow problems, SIAM Rev. 56, 261–273 (2014).
[15] R. E. Bank, PLTMG 13.0, www.netlib.org (2018).
[16] A. Klöckner, A. Barnett, L. Greengard, and M. O’Neil, Quadrature by expansion:
A new method for the evaluation of layer potentials, J. Comput. Phys. 252, 332–349
(2013).
[17] A. H. Barnett and T. Betcke, Stability and convergence of the method of fundamental
solutions for Helmholtz problems on analytic domains, J. Comput. Phys. 227, 7003–7026
(2008).
[18] G. Fairweather and A. Karageorghis, The method of fundamental solutions for el-
liptic boundary value problems, Adv. Comput. Math. 9, 69–95 (1998).
[19] Y. Liu, The Numerical Solution of Frequency-Domain Acoustic and Electromagnetic
Periodic Scattering Problems, PhD thesis, Dartmouth College (2016).
[20] V. Rokhlin, Rapid solution of integral equations of scattering theory in two dimen-
sions, J. Comput. Phys. 86, 414–439 (1990).
[21] A. H. Barnett and T. Betcke, An exponentially convergent nonpolynomial finite
element method for time-harmonic scattering from polygons, SIAM J. Sci. Comput. 32,
1417–1441 (2010).
[22] L. C. Evans, Partial Differential Equations, Amer. Math. Soc., 1998.


                                            7
