                                           LNO: Laplace Neural Operator for Solving Differential Equations
                                                               Qianying Caoa,b , Somdatta Goswamib , George Em Karniadakisb,c,∗
                                                         a
                                                             State Key Lab of Coastal and Offshore Engineering, Dalian University of Technology
                                                                            b
                                                                              Division of Applied Mathematics, Brown University
                                                                                  c
                                                                                    School of Engineering, Brown University




                                         Abstract
                                         We introduce the Laplace neural operator (LNO), which leverages the Laplace transform to decom-
                                         pose the input space. Unlike the Fourier Neural Operator (FNO), LNO can handle non-periodic




arXiv:2303.10528v2 [cs.LG] 30 May 2023
                                         signals, account for transient responses, and exhibit exponential convergence. LNO incorporates the
                                         pole-residue relationship between the input and the output space, enabling greater interpretability
                                         and improved generalization ability. Herein, we demonstrate the superior approximation accuracy
                                         of a single Laplace layer in LNO over four Fourier modules in FNO in approximating the solutions
                                         of three ODEs (Duffing oscillator, driven gravity pendulum, and Lorenz system) and three PDEs
                                         (Euler-Bernoulli beam, diffusion equation, and reaction-diffusion system). Notably, LNO outper-
                                         forms FNO in capturing transient responses in undamped scenarios. For the linear Euler-Bernoulli
                                         beam and diffusion equation, LNO’s exact representation of the pole-residue formulation yields
                                         significantly better results than FNO. For the nonlinear reaction-diffusion system, LNO’s errors are
                                         smaller than those of FNO, demonstrating the effectiveness of using system poles and residues as net-
                                         work parameters for operator learning. Overall, our results suggest that LNO represents a promising
                                         new approach for learning neural operators that map functions between infinite-dimensional spaces.
                                         Keywords: Operator Learning, neural operators, Laplace transformation, transient response, pole,
                                         residue


                                         1. Introduction
                                            Real-world problems in computational science and engineering that lack closed-form solutions
                                         often require the use of expensive numerical solvers taxing CPU/GPU resources substantially both
                                         in processing and memory. Even minor changes to the problem’s parameters frequently require
                                         running the numerical solver again, adding to the computational expense and time. However, the
                                         recent advancements in scientific machine learning, particularly the development of deep neural op-
                                         erators, offer a promising approach to solving parametrized ordinary/partial differential equations
                                         (ODEs/PDEs) using data-driven supervised learning. This approach offers an alternative and of-
                                         ten advantageous alternative to traditional numerical solvers. By training a deep neural operator
                                         on a sufficiently large and diverse dataset offline, it is possible to approximate the solution of an
                                         ODE/PDE over a wide range of parameter values very fast online without further training.
                                            Two neural operators that have shown promising results in approximating complex physical pro-
                                         cesses are the deep operator network introduced in 2019 [1] and the Fourier neural operator (FNO)

                                            ∗
                                             Corresponding author.
                                             Email addresses: qianying_cao@brown.edu (Qianying Cao), somdatta_goswami@brown.edu
                                         (Somdatta Goswami), george_karniadakis@brown.edu (George Em Karniadakis)


                                         Preprint submitted to Elsevier                                                                           May 31, 2023
introduced in 2020 [2]. In this work, we are particularly interested in developing a new neural oper-
ator, which addresses a specific bottleneck of FNO. Let us first recall that FNO is based on replacing
the kernel integral operator with a convolution operator defined in Fourier space by employing a fast
Fourier transform on the input space. The Fourier transform converts a physical system from the
time domain to the frequency domain. From the definition of the Fourier transform, we have that
the Fourier transform of a time-domain function x(t) is a continuous sum of exponential functions
of the form e−iωt , which means it adds the waves of positive and negative frequencies, where ω is
the frequency. However, there are functions for which the Fourier transform does not exist such as
|x(t)| because it is not absolutely integrable. Also, if we are interested in analyzing unstable sys-
tems then the Fourier transform cannot be used. The Laplace transform, on the other hand, redefines
the Fourier transform and includes an exponential convergence factor σ along with iω. Therefore,
using the Laplace transform, the time-domain signal x(t) can be represented as a sum of complex
exponential functions of the form e−st , where s = σ + iω.
The Fourier transform, F of x(t), and its first and second derivatives can be defined as:
                 Z ∞
    F {x(t)} =          x(t)e−iωt dt, F (ẋ(t)) = iωF {x(t)}, F (ẍ(t)) = −ω 2 F {x(t)}, (1)
                  t=−∞

which shows that the Fourier transform is not a suitable candidate for learning solutions for different
initial conditions, as the transformation has no term to take the initial value into account. On the
other hand, the Laplace transform, L of x(t) can be defined as:
                                                 Z ∞
                                    L {x(t)} =        x(t)e−st dt,                                  (2)
                                                  t=0
which is precisely motivated by the property that the differentiation of the time-dependent function
with respect to time corresponds to the multiplication of the transform L (s) by s [3]. More precisely,
                               L (ẋ) = L {x(t)} − x(0),                                           (3)
                               L (ẍ) = s2 L {x(t)} − sx(0) − ẋ(0),                               (4)
which clearly depicts that the transformation takes into account the initial conditions (displacement
and velocity), hence making it an appropriate candidate for learning neural operators with transient
responses caused by zero initial conditions.
   Motivated by the limitations of FNO, especially for capturing the transient responses and non-
period signals, and in order to exploit the advantages of the Laplace transformation, we propose
the Laplace neural operator (LNO), that considers the decomposition of the input space employing
the Laplace transform. The main idea behind this work is to employ a Laplace layer to replace the
multiple Fourier layers of FNO so that the network parameters (including the system poles µn and
residues βn ) are learned in the Laplace domain. The Laplace layer learns transient and steady-state
responses simultaneously, as opposed to the Fourier layer which is more suited to learn the steady-
periodic response. It is important to note that this work is not a trivial extension of replacing the
Fourier modules of FNO with a Laplace layer but the approach also provides a more meaningful
and physically interpretable mapping between the input and the output space on the Laplace domain
by employing the poles and residue formulation. A schematic of the proposed neural operator is
presented in Fig. 1.
   The main contributions of this work can be summarized as follows:

    • A novel framework to perform operator learning in the Laplace domain is proposed for solving
      ordinary and partial differential equations.


                                                  2
    • The physically meaningful pole-residue relationship between the functions in the input space
      and the system response is introduced into the network, which makes the operator more inter-
      pretable and endows it with good generalization ability.
    • The proposed framework can learn both transient and steady-periodic responses and, therefore,
      can be especially employed for systems without damping.
  The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we introduce the Laplace neural
operator. In Section 3, we compare the accuracy of the proposed LNO with FNO and gated recurrent
units (GRU) [4] for three time-dependent ODEs with transient responses. Finally, we summarize our
observations and provide concluding remarks in Section 4.


                                                                 𝑊

   (a)
         𝐟(𝑡)            𝑣(𝑡) ∈ ℝ                                                            𝑢(𝑡) ∈ ℝ            𝐱(𝑡)

                                                                         Laplace layer

                                           𝑉(𝑠)           Pole-Residue
                                                            Method
                                                                               𝑈(𝑠)
                                           𝐾 (𝑠)




   (b)
                                                                           Laplace layer
                        𝑉(𝑠)         𝛽             𝛾            𝑊 (𝑠)

                                                                                      𝑈(𝑠)

                       𝐾 (𝑠)         𝛼ℓ            𝜆ℓ           𝑊 (𝑠)




Fig. 1: (a) Schematic representation of the full architecture of Laplace neural operator (LNO). We start from an input
function f (t) and follow the following steps. 1. Lift the input function to a higher dimension by a shallow neural network
P. 2. Apply a Laplace layer and a local linear transform W . 3. Project the output, u(t), back to the target dimension
employing a shallow neural network, Q. (b) Laplace layer: start from input V (s). Top row: apply the pole-residue
method to compute the transient response residues γn based on system poles µn and residues βn ; express the transient
response in the Laplace domain. Bottom row: apply the pole-residue method to compute the steady-state response
residues λℓ based on input poles iωℓ and residues αℓ ; express the steady-state response in Laplace domain.



2. Neural Operators
   Neural operators are powerful machine learning models that can learn nonlinear mappings be-
tween infinite-dimensional functional spaces on bounded domains. They offer a unique simulation
framework for predicting multi-dimensional complex dynamics in real-time. Once trained, the neu-
ral operators are discretization invariant, meaning they can be applied across different parameteriza-
tions of the underlying functional data without requiring retraining. This makes them highly versatile

                                                            3
tools for being employed as an efficient surrogate model for learning parametrized ODEs/PDEs that
govern physical systems. Inspired by the universal approximation theorem of operators proposed
by Chen & Chen [5], the first neural operator, deep operator network (DeepONet) was proposed
in 2019 [1]. DeepONet is represented by a summation of the products of two or more deep neural
networks (DNNs), corresponding to the branch NN/s for the input function/s and the trunk NN for
the output function. All the NNs have general architectures, e.g., the branch NN can be replaced
with a CNN or a ResNet, and the trunk NN can be a fully connected NN or could be a network
with proper orthogonal modes etc. Motivated by the idea of neural operators, the Fourier neural
operator (FNO) was proposed in 2020, which employs the Green’s function as its backbone and the
convolution integral kernel in the Green’s function is parameterized directly in the Fourier space [2].
   As discussed in Section 1, herein we introduce the Laplace neural operator (LNO), which could
improve the approximation capacity of FNO in cases of transient responses and no damping con-
ditions for time-dependent ODEs/PDEs. Let Ω be a bounded open set in RD , and let X and Y be
separable Banach spaces defined on Ω with dimensions dx and dy , respectively. Suppose that a non-
linear map G : X → Y arises from the solution of a time-dependent PDE. The goal is to approximate
this non-linear operator by a parametric mapping as Gθ : X → Y, where θ are the network param-
eters that are learned through backpropagation, while training of the neural operator, based on the
labeled input-output pairs {fj , uj }N
                                     j=1 generated on a discretized domain Ω, where fj ∼ uj is an i.i.d
sequence from the probability measure u supported on X .

2.1. Laplace neural operator
   To implement the proposed LNO, the input function f (t) ∈ Rdx is first transformed into a higher
dimensional representation v(t) ∈ Rdz using a lifting layer, denoted by P. This layer is typically
realized by a shallow neural network or a linear transformation. Next, a nonlinear operator is applied
to this representation using the sum of the Laplace layer and a bias function in a neural network
architecture as:
                            u(t) = σ((κ(f ; ϕ) ∗ v)(t) + Wv(t)); x ∈ D,                            (5)
where σ is a nonlinear activation function, W is a linear transformation, and κ is a kernel integral
transformation. Lastly, the output x(t) is obtained by projecting u(t) through a local transformation
layer, Q. In Eq. 5, the kernel integral operator mapping is denoted as:
                                             Z
                         (κ(f ; ϕ) ∗ v)(t) =     κϕ (t, τ, f (t), f (τ ); ϕ)v(τ ) dτ,             (6)
                                             D
where κϕ is a neural network parameterized by ϕ. If we remove the dependence on the function f
and impose κϕ (t, τ ) = κϕ (t − τ ), Eq. 5 becomes a convolution operator:
                                                   Z
                               (κ(f ; ϕ) ∗ v)(t) =   κϕ (t − τ )v(τ ) dτ.                  (7)
                                                   D
Now in the next section, we build the relationship between the Laplace transform of the input func-
tion and the Laplace transform of the output function employing the Pole-residue formulation in the
Laplace layer.

2.2. Pole-residue formulation in Laplace layer
  We propose to replace the kernel integral operator in Eq. 7 with an operator defined in the Laplace
domain. By taking the Laplace transform of Eq. 7, we get
                            U (s) = L {(κ(f ; ϕ) ∗ v)(t)} = Kϕ (s)V (s),                           (8)

                                                  4
where L {.} and L −1 {.} are operators of the Laplace transform and inverse Laplace transform,
respectively; Kϕ (s) = L {κϕ (t)} and V (s) = L {v(t)}. We express Kϕ (s) in the pole-residue
form:
                                               N
                                              X     βn
                                     Kϕ (s) =            .                                  (9)
                                              n=1
                                                  s − µn
Here, we propose to choose Kϕ to be a neural network directly parameterized by: θ = (µ1 , · · · , µN , β1 , · · · , βN )
in the Laplace domain, where µn and βn are the trainable system poles and residues, respectively.
An irregular excitation signal v(t) with period T can be decomposed into its Fourier series:
                                         ∞
                                         X
                               v(t) =           αℓ exp(iωℓ t),    0 ≤ t < T,                           (10)
                                        ℓ=−∞

where ωℓ = ℓω1 , ω1 is the fundamental frequency in rad/s, and αℓ is the complex Fourier coefficient.
Taking the Laplace transform of Eq. (10) yields:
                                                 ∞
                                               X       αℓ
                                      V (s) =                .                                  (11)
                                              ℓ=−∞
                                                     s − iωℓ
  From U (s) = Kϕ (s)V (s), using Eqs. 9 and 11, one writes
                                      N
                                                 !     ∞
                                                                   !
                                     X      βn        X      αℓ
                           U (s) =                                   .                                 (12)
                                     n=1
                                          s − µn     ℓ=−∞
                                                           s − iωℓ
Expressing Eq. 12 in a pole-residue form yields [6, 7]
                                            N         ∞
                                            X  γn    X     λℓ
                                 U (s) =           +             .                                     (13)
                                         n=1
                                             s − µn ℓ=−∞ s − iωℓ
From Eqs. 12 and 13, the response residues corresponding to the first N response poles (i.e., at the
system poles, µn ) can be obtained by the residue theorem [3]:
                                 γn = lim (s − µn )U (s) = βn V (µn ),                                 (14)
                                         s→µn

where
                                                     ∞
                                                     X        αℓ
                                         V (µn ) =                  .                                  (15)
                                                          µ n − iωℓ
                                                     ℓ=−∞

Similarly, the response residues corresponding to the last response poles (i.e., at the excitation poles,
iωℓ ) are
                                λℓ = lim (s − iωℓ )U (s) = αℓ Kϕ (iωℓ ),                               (16)
                                        s→iωℓ

where
                                                       N
                                                       X      βn
                                         Kϕ (iωℓ ) =                .                                  (17)
                                                       n=1
                                                           iωℓ − µn




                                                       5
Once γn and λℓ are obtained, by taking the inverse Laplace transform of Eq. 13, we obtain:
                                       N
                                       X                      ∞
                                                              X
                            u1 (t) =         γn exp(µn t) +          λℓ exp(iωℓ t).                    (18)
                                       n=1                    ℓ=−∞

In Eq. 18, the first summation term of the right-hand side is the transient response related to the
system poles. The second summation term of the right-hand side is the familiar steady-state response
operated in the frequency domain.
Next, we summarize the primary differences between FNO and LNO:
   1. FNO chooses Kϕ to be a neural network parameterized by θ = (Kϕ (iω1 ), · · · , Kϕ (iωL )) in
      the frequency domain. However, LNO chooses Kϕ to be a neural network parameterized by
      θ = (µ1 , · · · , µN , β1 , · · · , βN ) in the Laplace domain, where µn and βn are the trainable sys-
      tem poles and residues, respectively.

   2. FNO computes the steady-state response in the frequency domain. However, LNO computes
      both the transient response and the steady-state response by the Laplace domain method.


3. Results
   In this section, we investigate the performance of the proposed Laplace neural operator (LNO)
in comparison with the Fourier neural operator (FNO) and the gated recurrent unit (GRU), which
is a promising recurrent neural network for studying three time-dependent non-linear ODEs that
exhibit transient behavior and three PDEs. As GRU is suitable for sequential data, we exclude it
from the PDE problems. A visual description of the different benchmarks considered in this section
is presented in Fig. 2. For each experiment, slightly different input functions are considered for the
training and testing samples to investigate the generalization ability of the neural operators. The
architectures of LNO, FNO, and GRU considered in each case are shown in Appendix Tables A.1
and A.2. The neural operators, LNO and FNO have been implemented using the PyTorch [8], and
GRU has been implemented using Tensorflow [9]. To evaluate the performance of the neural
operators and GRU, we compute the relative L2 error of the predictions of the test samples and
report the mean and standard deviation of this metric based on five independent training trials. A
summary of the error metric of all the experiments for all five problems is shown in Fig. 3.

3.1. Duffing oscillator
  The Duffing equation is a non-linear second-order differential equation used to model certain
damped and driven oscillators. The Duffing oscillator is an example of a forced oscillator with
nonlinear elasticity, and can be written as:
                                    mẍ + cẋ + k1 x + k3 x3 = f (t),                                  (19)
where f (t) is the externally applied force, m, c are the mass, damping coefficients, k1 and k3 stiffness
of the system, and x(t), ẋ(t) and ẍ(t) are the displacement, velocity, and acceleration of the dynamic
response, respectively. Eq. 19 is subjected to zero initial conditions x(0) = 0 and ẋ(0) = 0, and
the damping coefficient, c ≥ 0. The Duffing oscillator is one of the prototype systems of nonlinear
dynamics, which has been successfully utilized to model many processes, such as beam buckling,
stiffening springs, and ionization waves in plasmas.
   In this example, for simplicity we have considered m = 1, k1 = 1, and k3 = 1, and have studied
two scenarios:

                                                      6
                                                                                               Domain
                                       Input                                                visualization
          Application                                             Model Output
                                     function
                                                                                          Source     Target



                    c=0                                     𝑥̈ + 𝑐𝑥̇ + 𝑥 + 𝑥 = 𝑓 𝑡

       Duffing                                              𝑥 0 = 0,      𝑥̇ 0 = 0
      oscillator
                                                            𝐺 : 𝑓(𝑡) → 𝑥(𝑡)
                   c=0.5
                             𝑓        𝑡 = 𝐴𝑠𝑖𝑛(𝜔𝑡)

                             𝐴 ∈ [0.05 ∶ 0.05: 10]
                    c=0                                     𝑥̈ + 𝑐𝑥̇ + sin(𝑥) = 𝑓 𝑡
       Driven
      pendulum                                              𝑥 0 = 0,      𝑥̇ 0 = 0

                   c=0.5                                    𝐺 : 𝑓(𝑡) → 𝑥(𝑡)
                                𝑓   𝑡
                                = 𝐴𝑒 .     𝑠𝑖𝑛(𝜔𝑡)
                                                            𝑥̇ = 10(𝑦 − 𝑥)
                             𝐴 ∈ [0.14 ∶ 0.05: 9.09]
                   𝜌 = 10                                   𝑦̇ = 𝑥 𝜌 − 𝑧 − 𝑦
       Lorenz                                                         8
       system                                               𝑧̇ = 𝑥𝑦 − 𝑧 − 𝑓(𝑡)
                                                                      3
                   𝜌 = 15                                   𝑥 0 = 1, 𝑦 0 = 0, , 𝑧 0 = 0
                                                            𝐺 : 𝑓(𝑡) → 𝑥(𝑡)

                            𝑓        𝑥, 𝑡 = 𝐴𝑒 .
                                 (1 − 𝜔 )𝑠𝑖𝑛(𝜔𝑡)
                                                              𝜕 𝑦      𝜕 𝑦
        Euler-Bernoulli 𝐴 ∈ [0.05 ∶ 0.05: 10]            𝐸𝐼       + 𝜌𝐴     = 𝑓 𝑥, 𝑡
            beam                                              𝜕𝑥       𝜕𝑡
                        𝑓  𝑥, 𝑡 = 𝐴𝑒
                             (1 − 𝜔 )𝑠𝑖𝑛(𝜔𝑡)
                                                         𝐺 : 𝑓 𝑥, 𝑡 → 𝑦(𝑥, 𝑡)
                            𝐴 ∈ [1.24 ∶ 0.05: 10.19]

                            𝑓        𝑥, 𝑡 = 𝐴𝑒 .
                                 (1 − 𝜋 )𝑠𝑖𝑛(𝜋𝑥)                 𝜕 𝑦 𝜕𝑦
                                                             𝐷      −    = 𝑓 𝑥, 𝑡
           Diffusion            𝐴 ∈ [0.05 ∶ 0.05: 10]            𝜕𝑥   𝜕𝑡
           equation         𝑓    𝑥, 𝑡 = 𝐴𝑒
                            (1 − 𝜋 )𝑠𝑖𝑛(𝜋𝑥)                  𝐺 : 𝑓(𝑥, 𝑡) → 𝑦(𝑥, 𝑡)
                            𝐴 ∈ [1.24 ∶ 0.05: 10.19]

                            𝑓     𝑥, 𝑡 = 𝐴𝑒 .
                              1 − 𝜋 𝑠𝑖𝑛 𝜋𝑥                  𝜕 𝑦        𝜕𝑦
                             + 𝐴 𝑒 . sin(𝜋𝑥)            𝐷       + 𝑘𝑦 −    = 𝑓 𝑥, 𝑡
           Reaction-                                        𝜕𝑥         𝜕𝑡
       Diffusion system 𝐴 ∈ [0.05 ∶ 0.05: 10]
                            𝑓    𝑥, 𝑡 = 𝐴𝑒              𝐺 : 𝑓(𝑥, 𝑡) → 𝑦(𝑥, 𝑡)
                             1 − 𝜋 𝑠𝑖𝑛 𝜋𝑥
                            + 𝐴 𝑒 sin(𝜋𝑥)
                            𝐴 ∈ [0.14 ∶ 0.05: 9.09]



Fig. 2: A schematic representation of the examples and the subsequent experiment scenarios under consideration in this
                                                           7
work. Shown are representative plots of the input/output functions.
    • Scenario 1: A Duffing oscillator that does not include damping, i.e., c = 0.

    • Scenario 2: A Duffing oscillator that includes a damping term with the coefficient c = 0.5.

   Here, our goal is to learn the non-linear operator of the system in Eq. 19, which maps the forcing
function, f (t) (considered as input) to the system response denoted by x(t); that is, Gθ : f (t) → x(t).
To generate Ntrain samples to train LNO, we consider a sinusoidal forcing function, ftrain (t) =
Asin(5t), where the amplitude A ∈ [0.05, 10] with an interval δA = 0.05, therefore Ntrain = 200.
Each sample is discretized into 2048 temporal points and the time interval is ∆t = 0.01 seconds.
The response is calculated by a versatile ODE solver—ode45 on MATLAB. For validating and
testing the neural operator, we generated datasets considering a decaying sinusoidal forcing function,
ftest (t) = Ae−0.05t sin(5t), where the amplitude A ∈ [0.14, 9.09] and Nvali = 50 and Ntest = 130.
   The results presented in Fig. 3 demonstrate that LNO approximates the test cases of scenarios 1
and 2 with overall high accuracy. The improvement of the prediction of LNO over FNO is more
pronounced for oscillators without damping (Scenario 1: the first column of Fig. 3). If the damping
of a system is zero, there will always exist a transient response. The approximation accuracy of LNO
is better than FNO because it can capture both steady-state and transient responses, although it has
a higher standard deviation. LNO is more accurate than GRU when there is no damping, but GRU
is more accurate than LNO when the damping term is introduced, c = 0.5. The batch size used for
LNO affects its results, so choosing an appropriate value is essential. Fig. 4 (first and second rows)
presents the error plots of two representative test samples for each of the neural models. Additionally,
a visual representation of the prediction of the solution obtained from the two neural operators for
both scenarios is shown in Fig. 5. Figs. 5 (a) and (c) illustrate that the generalization gap of FNO
(the difference between a model’s performance on training data and its performance on unseen data)
is significantly higher than that of LNO.


            0.8


            0.7                                                                                   LNO
                                                                                                  FNO
                                                                                                  GRU
            0.6


            0.5


            0.4


            0.3


            0.2


            0.1


             0
                  Duffing   Duffing   Pendulum Pendulum   Lorenz   Lorenz    Beam    Diffusion   Reaction
                  (c=0)     (c=0.5)   (c=0)    (c=0.5)    ( =5)    ( =10)                        -Diffusion




Fig. 3: Relative L2 error in the test cases for all the ODE and PDE cases and for different scenarios considered in
each example. The plot shows the mean and the standard deviation of the error that has been computed based on five
independent training trials.




                                                          8
                                                                                       Point-wise prediction error

                                                                        Sample 1                                                                          Sample 2
                                          Ground truth                 LNO       FNO        GRU                            Ground truth                  LNO       FNO   GRU




                                                                                                     Magnitude (meters)
        Duffing


                    Magnitude (meters)              Error (meters)                                                                    Error (meters)
  𝑐 = 0.5     𝑐=0




                                                                                                     Magnitude (meters)
     Pendulum


                    Magnitude (meters)
                                                     Error (meters)                                                                   Error (meters)

  𝑐 = 0.5    𝑐=0




                     Magnitude (meters)                                                               Magnitude (meters)
      Lorenz
                                                     Error (meters)
                                                                                                                                       Error (meters)
  𝜌 = 10     𝜌=5


                                                                      Time (seconds)                                                                    Time (seconds)
Fig. 4: Pointwise error plots of responses for two representative test samples drawn from three ODE experiments. The
ground truth is plotted by red curves and the pointwise error for LNO, FNO, and GRU are presented by blue curves.




                                                                                               9
   (a)           Learning curve for c=0                                (b)                Samples for c=0
                                                                                                                   True    FNO
                                                                                                Case 25
                    Train error of LNO       Train error of FNO              2                                     LNO
                    Test error of LNO        Test error of FNO
                                                                             0
  100
                                                                             -2
                                                                                                Case 50
                                                                             2
                                                                             0
                                                                             -2
                                                                                                Case 75
                                                                             1
                                                                             0
  10-1
                                                                             -1
                                                                                               Case 100
                                                                         0.2
                                                                           0
                                                                        -0.2
         0    200        400           600       800         1000                 0   5          10           15           20
                               epoch                                                         Time (seconds)




   (c)         Learning curve for c=0.5                                (d)                Samples for c=0.5
  101                                                                                           Case 25             True   FNO
                    Train error of LNO       Train error of FNO          0.2                                        LNO
                    Test error of LNO        Test error of FNO           0.1
                                                                           0
                                                                        -0.1
                                                                                                Case 50
  100
                                                                         0.4
                                                                         0.2
                                                                           0
                                                                        -0.2

                                                                                                Case 75
  10-1
                                                                         0.2
                                                                         0.1
                                                                           0
                                                                        -0.1

                                                                                               Case 100
  10-2                                                                    1
                                                                        0.5
                                                                          0
         0    200        400           600       800         1000              0      5          10           15           20
                               epoch                                                         Time (seconds)



Fig. 5: Duffing oscillator: Comparison of training and testing losses and responses obtained using LNO and FNO: (a)
learning curve of the system without damping, (b) representative response obtained from the system without damping,
for test cases, (c) learning curve of the system with damping c = 0.5, (d) representative response obtained from the
system with damping c = 0.5, for test cases.




                                                                  10
3.2. Driven gravity pendulum
  In the next example, we consider a gravity pendulum subjected to an external force, f (t). The
equation which describes the motion of the pendulum is written as:
                                                   g
                                         ẍ + cẋ + sin(x) = f (t),                          (20)
                                                   l
                              subject to x(0) = 0, ẋ(0) = 0,                                (21)
where g is the magnitude of the gravitational field, l is the length of the rod; c is the damping
due to friction; x is the angle from the vertical to the pendulum; and f (t) is the external force.
For simplicity, we have chosen g/l = 1 in this example, and the following two scenarios are also
considered:
    • Scenario 1: the pendulum does not include damping, i.e., c = 0.

    • Scenario 2: the pendulum includes a damping term with the coefficient c = 0.5.
   For the driven gravity pendulum model, we consider the same forcing functions for training, ftrain ,
and testing, ftest as used in Section 3.1. Thus, Ntrain = 200, Nvali = 50, and Ntest = 130. The
corresponding responses, x(t) are also computed by ode45. We aim to learn the mapping from
the external force to the motion of the pendulum, that is, Gθ : f (t) → x(t). The third and the
fourth columns of Fig. 3 show the relative L2 errors of the predictions computed by the LNO, FNO,
and GRU for both scenarios. As observed in the previous example, LNO can predict the results
more accurately than FNO and GRU for the systems without damping. Fig. 4 (third and fourth rows)
presents the error plots of two representative test samples for each of the neural models. Additionally,
a visual representation of the prediction of the solution obtained from the two neural operators for
both scenarios is shown in Fig. 6.

3.3. Forced Lorenz system
   This example is the last ODE considered in this work. The Lorentz system is a mathematical
model that simplifies many practical problems, including electric circuits, atmospheric convection,
and forward osmosis. In this case, we are studying a forced Lorenz system, which has a forcing
term and may be more practical. For instance, climate studies can use this system to model the
temperature of the atmosphere and oceans as forcing terms [10]. The forced Lorenz system includes
three ODEs defined as:
                                      ẋ = σ(y − x),
                                      ẏ = x(ρ − z) − y, ,                                     (22)
                                      ż = xy − βz − f (t),
where x is proportional to the rate of convection, y is proportional to the horizontal temperature vari-
ation; z is proportional to the vertical temperature variation. The terms σ, ρ, and β are three constant
parameters related to the Prandtl number, Rayleigh number, and specific physical dimensions of the
layer, respectively. Even though the equations are simple, the Lorenz system has chaotic and unpre-
dictable behavior, so it is highly sensitive to initial conditions. The initial conditions in this example
are chosen slightly away from the state of no convection, that is x(0) = 1, y(0) = 0, z(0) = 0. The
σ = 10 and β = 8/3 are chosen in this example. We consider the following two scenarios:
    • Scenario 1: Rayleigh number ρ = 5.

    • Scenario 2: Rayleigh number ρ = 10.

                                                   11
   (a)             Learning curve for c=0                                       (b)                  Samples for c=0
                                                                                                                              True    FNO
                                                                                                           Case 25            LNO


                                                                       Response
                     Train error of LNO     Train error of FNO                        0.4
                     Test error of LNO      Test error of FNO                           0
                                                                                      -0.4

   100                                                                                                     Case 50


                                                                          Response
                                                                                        1
                                                                                        0
                                                                                       -1

                                                                                                           Case 75


                                                                          Response
                                                                                      0.5
                                                                                        0
                                                                                      -0.5

                                                                                                          Case 100


                                                                          Response
                                                                                        1
                                                                                        0
  10-1
                                                                                       -1
         0   200      400       600       800        1000      1200                          0   5          10           15           20
                              epoch                                                                     Time (seconds)




   (c)             Learning curve for c=0.5                                      (d)                 Samples for c=0.5
                                                                                                           Case 25
   101

                                                                           Response
                                                                                                                               True   FNO
                     Train error of LNO         Train error of FNO                       1                                     LNO
                                                                                       0.5
                     Test error of LNO          Test error of FNO                        0
                                                                                      -0.5

                                                                                                           Case 50
   100

                                                                           Response
                                                                                         1
                                                                                       0.5
                                                                                         0
                                                                                      -0.5

                                                                                                           Case 75
  10-1
                                                                           Response
                                                                                       0.6
                                                                                       0.2
                                                                                      -0.2

                                                                                                          Case 100


                                                                           Response
                                                                                       0.2
  10-2                                                                                 0.1
                                                                                         0
                                                                                      -0.1
         0   200      400       600       800        1000       1200                         0   5          10           15           20
                                                                                                        Time (seconds)
                               epoch

Fig. 6: Driven gravity pendulum: Comparison of training and testing losses and responses obtained using LNO and
FNO: (a) learning curve of the system without damping, (b) representative response obtained from the system without
damping, for test cases, (c) learning curve of the system with damping c = 0.5, (d) representative response obtained
from the system with damping c = 0.5, for test cases.




                                                                     12
   The number of samples for training, testing, and validation is kept the same as in the previous two
examples. We aim to learn the mapping from the source term, f (t) to the system response, x(t). The
results presented in Fig. 3 (last two columns) demonstrate that LNO approximates the test cases of
scenarios 1 and 2 with overall high accuracy. The improvement of the accuracy is more pronounced
in the case of ρ = 10, as we observe that the response has two patterns, which are shown in the
ground truth of the last row of Fig. 4. Figs. 7 (a) and (c) illustrate that the generalization gap of
FNO is significantly higher than that of LNO. Fig. 4 (last two rows) presents the error plots of two
representative test samples for each of the neural models. Additionally, a visual representation of
the prediction of the solution obtained from the two neural operators for both scenarios is shown in
Fig. 7.

3.4. Euler-Bernoulli beam
  For a dynamic 1D Euler-Bernoulli beam, the Euler-Lagrange equation is written as:
                                           ∂ 4y         ∂ 2y
                                     EI          +  ρA       = f (x, t),                            (23)
                                           ∂x4          ∂t2
where y(x, t) is the deflection of the beam at the location x and time t; f (x, t) is the source term;
E and I are the elastic modulus and the second moment of area of the cross-section of the beam,
respectively; ρ and A are the material density and the area of the cross-section of the beam, respec-
tively.
   Here, our goal is to learn the operator of the system in Eq. 23, which maps the source, f (x, t), to
the steady-state response y(x, t); that is, Gθ : f (x, t) → y(x, t). To generate Ntrain samples to train
LNO, we consider a function, ftrain (x, t) = Ae−0.05x (1 − 102 )sin(10t), where the amplitude A ∈
[0.05, 10] with an interval δA = 0.05, therefore Ntrain = 200. Each sample is discretized into 51×17
temporal-spatial grid points such that the time interval, ∆t = 0.02 seconds, and the spatial interval,
∆x = 0.1 meters. For validating and testing the neural operator, a function, ftest (x, t) = Ae−x (1 −
102 )sin(10t), is considered, where the amplitude A ∈ [1.24, 10.19] and Nvali = 50 and Ntest = 130.
While the analytical particular solution of Eq. 23 to ftrain is ytrain (x, t) = Ae−0.05x sin(10t), the
analytical particular solution to ftest is ytest (x, t) = Ae−x sin(10t).
   The third column from the end in Fig. 3 illustrates that the results predicted by LNO have an
overall high accuracy than FNO. Fig. 8 (first and second rows) presents the error plots of two repre-
sentative test samples for each of the neural models. The errors of LNO are more than an order of
magnitude smaller than those of FNO.

3.5. Diffusion equation
    The diffusion equation is a PDE that is applied in many fields, such as information theory, material
science, and biophysics. It is a special case of the convection-diffusion equation, which describes
the macroscopic behavior of lots of micro-particles in Brownian motion. The equation is usually
written as:
                                           ∂ 2 y ∂y
                                          D 2−         = f (x, t),                                    (24)
                                           ∂x       ∂t
where y(x, t) describes the density of the diffusing material at location x and time t; f (x, t) is the
source term; D is the collective diffusion coefficient for density y at location x. In this case, D = 1
is chosen. Thus, Eq. 24 is identical to the heat equation.
    For learning the operator of the system in Eq. 24, we consider a function, ftrain (x, t) = Ae−0.05t (1−
π 2 )sin(πx), where the amplitude A ∈ [0.05, 10] with an interval δA = 0.05, therefore Ntrain = 200.
Each sample is discretized into 25 × 80 temporal-spatial grid points such that the time interval,

                                                   13
   (a)           Learning curve for 𝜌 = 5                                   (b)           Samples for 𝜌 = 5
                                                                                                                True   FNO
   100                                                                                           Case 25
                      Train error of LNO         Train error of FNO               5                             LNO
                      Test error of LNO          Test error of FNO
                                                                                  0

  10-1                                                                                           Case 50
                                                                                  5

                                                                                  0

                                                                                                 Case 75
  10-2                                                                            5

                                                                                  0

                                                                                                 Case 100
  10-3                                                                            5

                                                                                  0
         0     200         400           600         800         1000                 0   5       10           15      20
                                 epoch                                                        Time (seconds)



   (c)           Learning curve for 𝜌 = 10                                  (d)           Samples for 𝜌 = 10

                                                                                                 Case 25        True   FNO
    100                                                                      10                                 LNO
                       Train error of LNO         Train error of FNO
                       Test error of LNO          Test error of FNO           5
                                                                              0
                                                                                                 Case 50
                                                                              10
                                                                               0
                                                                             -10
                                                                                                 Case 75
    10-1                                                                     10
                                                                              5
                                                                              0
                                                                                                Case 100
                                                                             10
                                                                              5
                                                                              0
           0    200         400            600        800         1000             0      5       10           15      20
                                                                                              Time (seconds)
                                  epoch



Fig. 7: Lorenz system: comparison of learning rates and responses of computed by LNO and FNO: (a) learning curve of
the system with ρ = 5, (b) response samples of the system with ρ = 5, (c) learning curve of the system with ρ = 10, (b)
response samples of the system with damping ρ = 10




                                                                       14
                                                         Ground truth           Point-wise prediction error
                                                                               LNO                      FNO




       Euler-Bernoulli Beam       Location (meters)




       Diffusion equation
                                     Location (meters)




      Reaction-Diffusion system
                                    Location (meters)




                                                         Time (seconds)               Time (seconds)



Fig. 8: Pointwise error plots of responses for two representative test samples drawn from three PDE experiments. The
ground truth is plotted in the left column and the point-wise errors for LNO and FNO are presented in the right section.


                                                                          15
∆t = 0.02 seconds, and the spatial interval, ∆x = 0.05 meters. For validating and testing the neural
operators, we generate a dataset considering the function, ftest (x, t) = Ae−t (1 − π 2 )sin(πx), where
the amplitude A ∈ [1.24, 10.19] and Nvali = 50 and Ntest = 130. The analytical particular solu-
tions of Eq. 24 to ftrain and ftest are ytrain (x, t) = Ae−0.05t sin(πx) and ytest (x, t) = Ae−t sin(πx),
respectively.
   The penultimate column in Fig. 3 indicates that the predictions made by LNO exhibit a higher level
of accuracy than FNO overall. Fig. 8 (rows three and four) displays error plots for two representative
test samples for each neural model. The errors of LNO are two orders of magnitude smaller than
those of FNO. It is worth noting that both the Euler-Bernoulli beam and the diffusion equation are
essentially learning linear operators. By utilizing the linear system to accurately represent the pole-
residue formulation, the results obtained with LNO in these two cases are considerably superior to
those achieved with FNO.

3.6. Reaction-diffusion system
   Reaction-diffusion systems describe the change in the concentration of chemical substances or
particles in time and space, which can be found in chemistry, biology, geology, and physics. The
diffusion-reaction equation can be represented as:
                                         ∂ 2y           ∂y
                                     D      2
                                               + ky 2 −    = f (x, t),                                 (25)
                                         ∂x             ∂t
where y(x, t) represents the concentration of chemical substances or particles at location x and time
t, f (x, t) is the source term and A is the amplitude of the source term. In this problem, the diffusion
coefficient, D = 0.01, and the reaction rate, k = 0.01.
   We utilize the neural operators LNO and FNO to learn the mapping from the source term, f (x, t)
to the steady-state response y(x, t), denoted as Gθ : f (x, t) → y(x, t). To generate Ntrain samples for
training LNO, we consider a function ftrain (x, t) = Ae−0.05t (1 − π 2 )sin(πx) + A2 e−0.1t sin(πx)2 ,
where A ∈ [0.05, 10] with an interval of δA = 0.05, resulting in Ntrain = 200 samples. Each
sample is discretized into 20 × 40 temporal-spatial grid points with a time interval of ∆t = 0.0526
seconds and a spatial interval of ∆x = 0.0513. For validation and testing of the neural operator, we
use a function ftest (x, t) = Ae−t (1 − π 2 )sin(πx) + A2 e−2t sin(πx)2 , where A ∈ [0.14, 9.09] with
Nvali = 50 validation samples and Ntest = 130 testing samples. The analytical particular solution of
ftrain for Eq. 25 is ytrain (x, t) = Ae−0.05t sin(πx), while the analytical particular solution for ftest is
ytest (x, t) = Ae−t sin(πx).
   The final column of Fig. 3 shows that LNO produces more accurate results overall than FNO.
Fig. 8 (last two rows) displays error plots of two typical test samples for each of the neural models.
LNO has smaller errors than FNO, indicating that using the poles and residues of the system as
network parameters aids in operator learning, even when dealing with the steady-state response of
nonlinear systems.

4. Summary
   In this work, we proposed a novel framework, called the Laplace neural operator (LNO), which
parameterizes the integral kernel directly in the Laplace domain, and employs the poles and residue
formulation to establish a relationship between the Laplace transforms of the functions in the input
and the output spaces. The system poles and residues are the network parameters that are trained
and learned in the Laplace domain, thereby making the proposed operator more interpretable. The



                                                    16
consideration of the initial conditions and the presence of an additional exponential convergence fac-
tor in the formulation of the Laplace transformation addresses the challenges encountered by FNO
when trying to approximate initial value problems, transient responses, or multiple patterns in the
solution. By investigating three ODEs (Duffing oscillator, driven gravity pendulum, and Lorenz sys-
tem) and three PDEs (Euler-Bernoulli beam, Diffusion equation, and Reaction-Diffusion system),
we demonstrate that the new operator, LNO, with a single module of Laplace transform predicts
the response of a time-dependent system with better accuracy compared to FNO in all cases, where
the FNO was architectured with four Fourier modules. Furthermore, compared to a commonly used
recurrent neural network— gated recurrent unit (GRU), LNO is more accurate in scenarios specifi-
cally considering no damping as well as systems with two or more types of patterns in the responses.
From three PDE experiments, we found that expressing the neural network by trainable system poles
and residues is very helpful for operator learning even though the steady-state response of nonlinear
systems is considered. Overall, LNO represents a promising new approach for learning operators
that map functions between infinite-dimensional functional spaces, especially when different forms
of the input functions for training and testing are considered.

    • Setting up different input function forms is used to investigate and demonstrate the general-
      ization ability of LNO. If the input function forms are same, the prediction accuracy of LNO
      and FNO are very similar.

    • Our derivation of LNO begins from the convolution integral. By using the pole-residue for-
      mulation, the analytical solution is obtained. When the input v(t) is the source term, the
      convolution integral is physically meaningful, and the relationship among the source term,
      system and response exactly satisfies the pole-residue formulation. However, if the input v(t)
      is the initial conditions, the convolution integral does not have the physical meaning. Thus,
      the pole-residue formulation does not work significantly better than FNO. We will try to make
      the improvement for solving this problem.

Acknowledgement
  This work was supported by the U.S. Department of Energy, Advanced Scientific Computing Re-
search program, under the Scalable, Efficient and Accelerated Causal Reasoning Operators, Graphs
and Spikes for Earth and Embedded Systems (SEA-CROGS) project, DE- SC0023191. The au-
thors would like to acknowledge the computing support provided by the computational resources
and services at the Center for Computation and Visualization (CCV), Brown University where all
experiments were carried out.




                                                 17
Appendix A. Network Architectures


     Table A.1: Hyperparameters used in the LNO and FNO for training an operator to approximate the response
                  Application                       Layer       Width     Mode 1   Mode 2        Learning rate      Batch size      Activation function   Epochs
                                           LNO        1            4        16       /              0.002              20                   sin            1000
                                 c=0
                                           FNO        4          128       1025      /              0.002              20                   sin            1000
     Duffing oscillator
                                           LNO        1            4        16       /              0.002              20                   sin            1000
                                c = 0.5
                                           FNO        4           32       1025      /              0.002              20                   sin            1000
                                           LNO        1            4        20       /              0.005              40                   sin            1200
                                 c=0
                                           FNO        4           32       1025      /              0.002              40                   sin            1200
     Driven pendulum
                                           LNO        1            4         8       /              0.002              40                   sin            1200
                                c = 0.5
                                           FNO        4           32       1025      /              0.002              40                   sin            1200
                                           LNO        1            4        16       /              0.005              20                  tanh            1000
                                 ρ=5
                                           FNO        4           32       1025      /              0.002              20                  tanh            1000
      Lorenz system
                                           LNO        1            4        84       /              0.002              10                  tanh            1000
                                ρ = 10
                                           FNO        4           32       1025      /              0.002              20                  tanh            1000
                                           LNO        1           16         4       4              0.002              50                   sin            1000
           Beam                   /
                                           FNO        4           64         9      26              0.002              50                   sin            1000
                                           LNO        1           16         4       4              0.002              50                   sin            1000
    Diffusion equation            /
                                           FNO        4           64        41      13              0.002              50                   sin            1000
                                           LNO        1           48         4       4              0.002              50                   sin            1000
 Reaction-Diffusion system        /
                                           FNO        4           32        40      11              0.002              50                   sin            1000




                                Table A.2: Hyperparameters of the GRU with zero initial conditions
                Application               NO. of hidden layer     Width     NO. of dense layer      Learning rate      Batch size      Iterations
        Duffing oscillator   c=0                   1               10               1                  0.001              128            20000
        Duffing oscillator c = 0.5                 1               10               1                  0.001              128            30000
           Pendulum          c=0                   1               10               1                  0.001              128            20000
           Pendulum         c = 0.5                1               10               1                  0.001              128            30000
         Lorenz system       ρ=5                   1               10               1                  0.001              128            30000
         Lorenz system      ρ = 10                 1               20               1                  0.001              128            30000


References
 [1] L. Lu, P. Jin, G. Pang, Z. Zhang, G. Karniadakis, Learning nonlinear operators via DeepONet
     based on the universal approximation theorem of operators, Nature Machine Intelligence 3 (3)
     (2021) 218–229.
 [2] Z. Li, N. Kovachki, K. Azizzadenesheli, B. Liu, K. Bhattacharya, A. Stuart, A. Anandku-
     mar, Fourier Neural Operator for Parametric Partial Differential Equations, arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2010.08895 (2020).
 [3] E. Kreyszig, Advanced engineering mathematics, John Wiley & Sons, 2010.
 [4] P. R. Vlachas, J. Pathak, B. R. Hunt, T. P. Sapsis, M. Girvan, E. Ott, P. Koumoutsakos, Forecast-
     ing of spatio-temporal chaotic dynamics with recurrent neural networks: A comparative study
     of reservoir computing and backpropagation algorithms, arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.05266
     (2019) 42.
 [5] T. Chen, H. Chen, Universal approximation to nonlinear operators by neural networks with
     arbitrary activation functions and its application to dynamical systems, IEEE Transactions on
     Neural Networks 6 (4) (1995) 911–917.
 [6] Q. Cao, S.-L. James Hu, H. Li, Laplace-and frequency-domain methods on computing transient
     responses of oscillators with hysteretic dampings to deterministic loading, Journal of Engineer-
     ing Mechanics 149 (3) (2023) 04023005.

                                                                          18
 [7] S.-L. J. Hu, F. Liu, B. Gao, H. Li, Pole-residue method for numerical dynamic analysis, Journal
     of Engineering Mechanics 142 (8) (2016) 04016045.

 [8] A. Paszke, S. Gross, F. Massa, A. Lerer, J. Bradbury, G. Chanan, T. Killeen, Z. Lin,
     N. Gimelshein, L. Antiga, et al., PyTorch: An Imperative Style, High-Performance Deep
     Learning Library, Advances in neural information processing systems 32 (2019).

 [9] A. Agarwal, P. Barham, E. Brevdo, Z. Chen, C. Citro, Tensorflow: A system for large-scale
     machine learning, in: Proceedings of the 12th USENIX Conference on Operating Systems
     Design and Implementation, USENIX Association, 2016.

[10] Y. Shi, Analysis on averaging Lorenz system and its application to climate, Ph.D. thesis, Uni-
     versity of Minnesota (2021).




                                                19
