Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory
LBL Publications

Title
Modelica Buildings Library:

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/14d271qz

Authors
Wetter, Michael
Zuo, Wangda
Nouidui, Thierry
et al.

Publication Date
2015-09-28




 eScholarship.org                           Powered by the California Digital Library
                                                            University of California
Modelica Buildings Library
Michael Wetter, Wangda Zuoa, Thierry S.
Nouidui, Xiufeng Pang

Environmental Technologies Area
September, 2015
                                                                                        LBNL-Technical Report
                               Cite as: Michael Wetter, Wangda Zuo, Thierry S. Nouidui and Xiufeng Pang.
                     Modelica Buildings library. Journal of Building Performance Simulation, 7(4), 253–270, 2014.
                                                                            DOI:10.1080/19401493.2013.765506




Modelica Buildings library
  Michael Wetter, Wangda Zuoa , Thierry S. Nouidui, Xiufeng Pang
  Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory
  Energy Technologies Area
  Building Technology and Urban Systems Department
  Simulation Research Group
  Berkeley, CA 94720, USA

  September 28, 2015


Abstract

This paper describes the Buildings library, a free open-source library
that is implemented in Modelica, an equation-based object-oriented
modeling language. The library supports rapid prototyping, as well
as design and operation of building energy and control systems.
   First, we describe the scope of the library, which covers HVAC
systems, multi-zone heat transfer and multi-zone airflow and con-
taminant transport. Next, we describe differentiability requirements
and address how we implemented them. We describe the class hi-
erarchy that allows implementing component models by extending
partial implementations of base models of heat and mass exchang-
ers, and by instantiating basic models for conservation equations
and flow resistances. We also describe associated tools for pre- and
post-processing, regression tests, co-simulation and real-time data
exchange with building automation systems.
   The paper closes with an example of a chilled water plant, with
and without water-side economizer, in which we analyzed the
system-level efficiency for different control setpoints.




a Current address: College of Engineering, University of Miami,

Coral Gables, FL 33146, USA
                                                                         2



Disclaimer

This document was prepared as an account of work sponsored by the
United States Government. While this document is believed to con-
tain correct information, neither the United States Government nor
any agency thereof, nor the Regents of the University of California,
nor any of their employees, makes any warranty, express or implied,
or assumes any legal responsibility for the accuracy, completeness,
or usefulness of any information, apparatus, product, or process dis-
closed, or represents that its use would not infringe privately owned
rights. Reference herein to any specific commercial product, process,
or service by its trade name, trademark, manufacturer, or otherwise,
does not necessarily constitute or imply its endorsement, recommen-
dation, or favoring by the United States Government or any agency
thereof, or the Regents of the University of California. The views and
opinions of authors expressed herein do not necessarily state or re-
flect those of the United States Government or any agency thereof or
the Regents of the University of California.
1   INTRODUCTION                                                                                                             3



1   Introduction

This paper describes the free open-source Modelica Buildings li-
brary. Modelica is an equation-based, object-oriented language that
has been developed to model complex engineered systems that are
described by coupled systems of differential, algebraic and discrete
equations.1 The Buildings library is an open-source, free library                    1
                                                                                      Mattsson, S. E. and H. Elmqvist (1997,
with component and system models for building energy and control                     April). Modelica – An international
                                                                                     effort to design the next generation
systems. The library is accompanied by Python modules that can be                    modeling language. In L. Boullart,
used to automate simulations and post-processing results, and by a                   M. Loccufier, and S. E. Mattsson (Eds.),
                                                                                     7th IFAC Symposium on Computer Aided
user guide.                                                                          Control Systems Design, Gent, Belgium
   The library has been developed to support the following use cases
in addition to conventional energy analysis:

Support for rapid prototyping: Users can rapidly add new component
  and system models by modifying existing models or extending ba-
  sic models that implement, for example, steady-state and dynamic
  energy and mass balances of a heat and mass exchanger.2                            2
                                                                                      Wetter, M. (2009a). A modelica-based
                                                                                     model library for building energy and
Modeling of arbitrary HVAC system topologies: Users can model HVAC                   control systems. In P. A. Strachan, N. J.
  systems with non-conventional piping or ducting layout, and user-                  Kelly, and M. Kummert (Eds.), Proc. of
                                                                                     the 11-th IBPSA Conference, pp. 652–659.
  defined control algorithms. This allows for example the perfor-                    International Building Performance
  mance assessment of novel hydronic heating system where pumps                      Simulation Association and University
  located at each radiator replace the central pump and a hierarchi-                 of Strathclyde

  cal controller adjusts the furnace temperature based on the pump
  speed.3                                                                            3
                                                                                      Wetter, M. (2009a). A modelica-based
                                                                                     model library for building energy and
Development, verification and hardware-in-the-loop testing of control algorithms:    control systems. In P. A. Strachan, N. J.
  Users can use models from the library to support development of                    Kelly, and M. Kummert (Eds.), Proc. of
                                                                                     the 11-th IBPSA Conference, pp. 652–659.
  model-based control algorithms, and then verify the control se-                    International Building Performance
  quences in a hardware-in-the-loop configuration. This process is                   Simulation Association and University
  described by Nouidui et al. (2012)4 , where a thermal model of a                   of Strathclyde
                                                                                  4
                                                                                    Nouidui, T. S., K. Phalak, W. Zuo, and
  room has been linked to Radiance and to a test cell in order to                 M. Wetter (2012, September). Validation
  optimize the control of the blinds. For an example, where a hi-                 and application of the room model
  erarchical supervisory and local loop control algorithm has been                of the modelica Buildings library. In
                                                                                  Proc. of the 9-th International Modelica
  verified in simulation, see the implementation of the variable air              Conference, Munich, Germany, pp.
  volume flow control sequence from the ASHRAE Sequences of                       727–736. Modelica Association
                                             5
  Operation for Common HVAC Systems. In this example, the su-                     5
                                                                                    ASHRAE (2006). Sequences of Operation
  pervisory control algorithm is implemented using a state graph                  for Common HVAC Systems. Atlanta,
                                                                                  GA: ASHRAE; and Wetter, M. (2011b).
  and the local loop control is implemented using block diagrams.                 Co-simulation of building energy and
  Provan and Venturini6 developed a stochastic predictive control                 control systems with the building
                                                                                  controls virtual test bed. Journal of
  algorithm for an underfloor heating system. The authors coupled                 Building Performance Simulation 4, 185–
  discrete-time stochastic simulation with a Modelica model that                  203
  computes room temperature and energy consumption.
                                                                                  6
                                                                                    Provan, G. and A. Venturini (2012,
                                                                                     September). Stochastic simulation
Stabilization of feedback control: Users can start with a process model              and interference using modelica. In
                                                                                     Proc. of the 9-th International Modelica
   that may be non-linear and based on first principles. Next, they
                                                                                     Conference, Munich, Germany. Modelica
                                                                                     Association
1   INTRODUCTION                                                                                                  4



    can linearize the model around a set of steady-state operating
    points in order to analyze in the frequency domain the gain and
    phase margins.7 Alternatively, the linearized models may be used       7
                                                                             Eisenhower, B., K. Gasljevic, and
    as input to a model order reduction algorithm. Model order re-         I. Mezić (2012, August). Control-
                                                                           oriented modeling and calibration of
    duction algorithms compute a low order model that is suitable for      building energy models using modelica.
    gain scheduling in the frequency domain.8                              In Proc. of SimBuild, Madison, WI.
                                                                           IBPSA-USA
Emulation of faults at the whole building-system level: For example, the   8
                                                                             Wetter, M. (2009b, June). Modelica-
  LearnHVAC9 and Learn High Performance Buildings10 interactive            based modeling and simulation to
                                                                           support research and development
  eLearning software allows testing a variety of fault scenarios and       in building energy and control sys-
  examining the impact of faults on whole building performance.            tems. Journal of Building Performance
                                                                           Simulation 2(2), 143–161
  In these tools, models of faulty equipment or faulty controllers         9
                                                                             SuPerB (2012). Learnhvac educational
  are part of a dynamic whole building model that includes HVAC,           software
  building envelope and detailed control algorithms whose feedback         10
                                                                              Deringer, J. J., J. E. Nahman, K. Hem-
                                                                           ing, M. Wetter, X. Pang, and M. Kon-
  loops may compensate for some of the faults.                             stantoglou (2012, August). LearnHPB
                                                                           and eLAD - two related online eLearn-
   The above list represents applications in which the Buildings li-       ing platforms for high performance
brary has already been used. Work is currently in progress to use          buildings. Summer Study on Energy
                                                                           Efficiency in Buildings, Pacific Grove,
models from the Buildings library in fault detection and diagnostics       CA. ACEEE
algorithms, and to build models for model-based design of full-scale
experiments at the Facility for Low Energy Experiments in Build-
ings11 that is currently under construction at the Lawrence Berkeley       11
                                                                                See http://flexlab.lbl.gov/
National Laboratory (LBNL). In the future, we also envision the
library to be increasingly used in conjunction with Building Informa-
tion Models (BIM) and as the underlying technology for simulating
HVAC and control systems in next-generation building simulation
programs that can model arbitrary configurations of HVAC systems,
including their continuous time, discrete time and event-driven con-
trol sequences.
   If next-generation BIM also contain a modular description of the
HVAC systems including their control logic, then advanced modeling
and simulation programs will be needed that can solve the coupled
systems of differential, algebraic and discrete equations that contain
continuous time, discrete time and event-driven dynamics. If such
next generation BIM standards contain specification of operational
sequences, then more flexible simulation programs will be needed
that allow the same semantics as actual control sequences. By same
semantics, we mean that the control input will need to be a physical
quantity that is measured by a sensor and not a “load” with units
of power that is required to meet a set-point under the assumption
of idealized control, as is customary in many building simulation
programs. Furthermore, the output of the controller will need to be
an actuator signal, such as a damper position, and not an air flow
rate as is customary in conventional building simulation programs
(such as EnergyPlus and DOE-2) that do not compute the pressure
1   INTRODUCTION                                                                                                   5



distribution in duct networks. This is because the air flow rate is not
only a function of the damper position, but also of the damper au-
thority, fan speed, fan curve, duct distribution network and position
of other dampers that are part of the same duct network. In addition,
it should be possible to model HVAC systems with any topology of
the duct and piping network, and not only systems that can be de-
composed into primary loops and secondary loops as is assumed in
other energy simulation programs.12                                       12
                                                                             Wetter, M. (2011a). Building Perfor-
    The use of acausal model formulations for building energy sys-        mance Simulation for Design and Automa-
                                                                          tion, Chapter The Future of Building
tems can be traced back to Silverman et al. (1981).13 They describe       System Modeling and Simulation, pp.
a network formulation that uses a node and arc formulation, where         481–504. Oxon, OX: Taylor & Francis
nodes are components (equipment or zones) that do not have dis-
                                                                          13
                                                                             Silverman, G., S. Jurovics, D. Low,
                                                                          and E. Sowell (1981). Modeling and
tinct inputs and outputs, and each arc carries fluid properties. The      optimization of HVAC systems using
equations are then posed as an optimization problem where the inde-       network concepts. ASHRAE Transac-
                                                                          tions 87(2), 585–597
pendent variables are the variables of the arcs and the constraints are
the equations of the nodes. This work led to the development of the
PC-based energy simulation program ENET that was first presented
by Low and Sowell in 198214 and then by Sowell et al. in 1984.15 In       14
                                                                             Low, D. and E. Sowell (1982, Septem-
these papers, the authors describe how ENET selects from a network        ber). ENET, a PC-based building energy
                                                                          simulation system. In Energy Programs
definition and a set of equipment modules, a suitable set of equations    Conference, Austin, Texas, pp. 2–7. IBM
using graph theory. These equations are then translated to high-level     Real Estate and Construction Division
                                                                          15
                                                                             Sowell, E., K. Taghavi, H. Levy, and
language instructions directly acceptable to a compiler. These devel-     D. Low (1984). Generation of building
opments provided the foundation of the SPANK program16 , which            energy system models. ASHRAE
was later renamed to SPARK.17                                             Transactions 90(1B), 573–586
                                                                          16
                                                                             Sowell, E. F., W. F. Buhl, A. E. Er-
                                                                          dem, and F. C. Winkelmann (1986,
                                                                          September). A prototype object-based
                                                                          system for HVAC simulation. Technical
                                                                          Report LBL-22106, Lawrence Berke-
                                                                          ley National Laboratory; and Sowell,
                                                                          E. F., W. F. Buhl, and J.-M. Nataf (1989,
                                                                          June). Object-oriented programming,
                                                                          equation-based submodels, and system
                                                                          reduction in SPANK. In Proceedings
                                                                          of the Second International IBPSA Con-
                                                                          ference, Vancouver, BC, Canada, pp.
                                                                          141–146
                                                                          17
                                                                             Buhl, W., A. Erdem, F. Winkelmann,
                                                                          and E. Sowell (1993, August). Recent
                                                                          improvements in SPARK: Strong com-
                                                                          ponent decomposition, multivalued
                                                                          objects,and graphical interface. In Proc.
                                                                          of the 3-rd IBPSA Conference, Adelaide,
                                                                          Australia, pp. 283–291
1   INTRODUCTION                                                                                                 6



   In 1989, Sahlin and Sowell propose a simulator-neutral and nat-
ural format for component model expression called Neutral Model
Format (NMF), which can be converted to efficient numerical al-
gorithmic form.18 NMF is still in use in the commercial software        18
                                                                          Sahlin, P. and E. F. Sowell (1989,
IDA/ICE.19 In 1991, Charlesworth et al. developed the Energy Kernel     June). A neutral format for building
                                                                        simulation models. In Proceedings of the
System, which appears to be the first attempt that adopted an object-   Second International IBPSA Conference,
oriented programming paradigm that uses both, object-instantiation      Vancouver, BC, Canada, pp. 147–154

and object-inheritance, for the creation of building energy perfor-
                                                                        19
                                                                          Björsell, N., A. Bring, L. Eriksson,
                                                                        P. Grozman, M. Lindgren, P. Sahlin,
mance models.20                                                         A. Shapovalov, and M. Vuolle (1999,
   Equation-based acausal modeling languages have been used ear-        September). IDA indoor climate and
                                                                        energy. In N. Nakahara, H. Yoshida,
lier for applications other than building energy simulation: In 1978,   M. Udagawa, and J. Hensen (Eds.),
Elmqvist21 introduced in his dissertation the Dymola modeling lan-      Proc. of the 6-th IBPSA Conference, Kyoto,
guage for large continuous systems in which ordinary differential       Japan, pp. 1035–1042
                                                                        20
                                                                           Charlesworth, P., J. A. Clarke,
equations and algebraic equations need not be converted to assign-      G. Hammond, A. Irving, K. James,
ment statements, and which employs equation sorting and formula         B. Lee, S. Lockley, R. D. Mac, D. Tang,
manipulation. In 1997, Mattsson and Elmqvist report on an inter-        T. J. Wiltshire, and A. J. Wright (1991,
                                                                        August). The energy kernel system. In
national effort to design Modelica, a next generation modeling lan-     J. A. Clarke, J. W. Mitchell, and R. C. V.
guage, which incorporates many ideas of the algorithms presented in     de Perre (Eds.), Proc. of the IBPSA Con-
                                                                        ference, Nice, France
the dissertation of Elmqvist.22                                         21
                                                                           Elmqvist, H. (1978). A structured model
   Modelica has been applied earlier for building energy model-         language for large continuous systems. Ph.
ing applications but an extensive free open-source library with both    D. thesis, Lund Institute of Technology,
                                                                        Lund, Sweden
steady-state and dynamic component models for building energy           22
                                                                           Mattsson, S. E. and H. Elmqvist (1997,
systems has not yet been available. Other open-source developments      April). Modelica – An international
of building energy models in Modelica that are freely available have    effort to design the next generation
                                                                        modeling language. In L. Boullart,
been reported by Merz (2002)23 and by Felgner et al. (2002)24 who       M. Loccufier, and S. E. Mattsson (Eds.),
describe the library ATPlus for thermal building simulation. In 2005,   7th IFAC Symposium on Computer Aided
Hoh et al. expanded the components of the ATPlus library to include     Control Systems Design, Gent, Belgium
                                                                        23
                                                                           Merz, R. M. (2002, September). Ob-
a room model with heat exchangers that are embedded in wall con-        jektorientierte Modellierung thermischen
structions.25                                                           Gebäudeverhaltens. Ph. D. thesis, Univer-
                                                                        sität Kaiserslautern
                                                                        24
                                                                           Felgner, F., S. Agustina, R. C. Bohigas,
                                                                        R. Merz, and L. Litz (2002, March).
                                                                        Simulation of thermal building be-
                                                                        haviour in modelica. In M. Otter (Ed.),
                                                                        Proceedings of the 2nd Modelica con-
                                                                        ference, Oberpfaffenhofen, Germany,
                                                                        pp. 147–154. Modelica Association
                                                                        and Deutsches Zentrum fur Luft- und
                                                                        Raumfahrt
                                                                        25
                                                                           Hoh, A., T. Haase, T. Tschirner, and
                                                                        D. Müller (2005, March). A combined
                                                                        thermo-hydraulic approach to simu-
                                                                        lation of active building components
                                                                        applying modelica. In G. Schmitz (Ed.),
                                                                        Proceedings of the 4th Modelica confer-
                                                                        ence, Hamburg, Germany. Modelica
                                                                        Association and Hamburg University of
                                                                        Technology
3   SCOPE                                                                                                           7



   A hygrothermal building model has been developed for the Mod-
elica BuildingPhysicsLibrary library which allows multizone build-
ing heat and mass transfer analysis.26 A prototype CFD package             26
                                                                              Nytsch-Geusen, C., T. Nouidui,
of Modelica models has been coupled to models of conductive heat           A. Holm, , and W. Haupt (2005, Au-
                                                                           gust). A hygrothermal building model
transfer and controls.27 Badakhshani and Mueller (2010) developed          based on the object-oriented modeling
a Modelica library to conduct exergy analysis of space heating sys-        language modelica. In I. Beausoleil-
                                                                           Morrison and M. Bernier (Eds.), Pro-
tems.28 Bonvini and Leva (2011) implemented, in Modelica, object-          ceedings of the Ninth International IBPSA
oriented sub-zonal models for two-dimensional room air flow.29             Conference, Volume 1, Montreal, Canada,
   Commercial libraries for steady-state and transient simulation of       pp. 867–876. International Building Per-
                                                                           formance Simulation Association and
thermodynamic systems include the AirConditioning library and              Ecole Polytechnique de Montreal; and
the TIL library.30 Both libraries model thermodynamic machines,            Nouidui, T., K. Sedlbauer, C. Nytsch-
                                                                           Geusen, and K. Kießl (2009, October).
including the dynamics of vapor compression cycles, based on the           Neue objektorientierte hygrothermische
geometry of the equipment. They have been primarily used for prod-         modellbibliothek zur ermittlung des
uct development of thermodynamic machines as opposed to whole              hygrothermischen und hygienischen
                                                                           komforts in räumen. Bauphysik 31(5),
building simulation.                                                       271–278
                                                                           27
                                                                              Brown, J. (2010, November). Computa-
                                                                           tional fluid dynamics in an equation-based,
2   Nomenclature                                                           acausal modeling environment. Ph. D.
                                                                           thesis, Georgia Institute of Technology,
1. We denote by R the set of real numbers.                                 Atlanta, GA
                                                                           28
                                                                              Badakhshani, A. and D. Müller (2010,
2. We use , to denote equal by definition.                                 September). Dynamische exergetische
                                                                           Analyse von Gebäuden anhand der
3. f (·) denotes a function where (·) stands for the undesignated          Gesamtsystemsimulation in der objekt-
                                                                           orientierten programmiersprache
   variables. f ( x ) denotes the value of f (·) for the argument x.       Modelica. In BauSim, Vienna, Austria.
   f : A → B indicates that the domain of f (·) is in the space A,         IBPSA Austria-Germany
   and that the image of f (·) is in the space B.                          29
                                                                              Bonvini, M. and A. Leva (2011).
                                                                           Object-oriented sub-zonal modelling
4. We say that a function f : Rn → R is once continuously dif-             for efficient energy-related building
                                                                           simulation. Mathematical and Computer
   ferentiable if f (·) is defined on Rn , and if f (·) has a continuous   Modelling of Dynamical Systems 17(6),
   derivative on Rn .                                                      543–559
                                                                           30
                                                                              Tummescheit, H., J. Eborn, and
5. For a function f : R → R, we say that f (·) is globally bounded if      K. Prölss (2005, March). AirCon-
   there exists a β > 0 such that | f ( x )| < β for all x ∈ R.            ditioning - a Modelica library for
                                                                           dynamic simulation of AC systems. In
6. We use typewriter font for the names of Modelica classes (pack-         G. Schmitz (Ed.), Proceedings of the 4th
                                                                           Modelica conference, Hamburg, Germany,
   ages, models etc.).                                                     pp. 185–192. Modelica Association and
                                                                           Hamburg University of Technology;
                                                                           and Schulze, C., M. Gräber, M. Huhn,
3   Scope                                                                  and U. Grätz (2011, March). Real-time
                                                                           simulation of vapour compression
The Buildings library version 1.2 build 1 contains dynamic and             cycles. In Proc. of the 8-th International
                                                                           Modelica Conference, Dresden, Germany,
steady-state models for building energy and control systems. The           pp. 48–55. Modelica Association
library contains models for air-based HVAC systems, water-based
heating systems, controls, heat transfer among rooms and the out-
side, and multizone airflow, including natural ventilation and con-
taminant transport. A detailed description of all models can be found
online at http://simulationresearch.lbl.gov/modelica. The mod-
els are organized in the following main packages:
3   SCOPE                                                                                                           8



User’s Guide: This package contains a user’s guide for the library.
  In addition, some individual packages contain additional user’s
  guides that are applicable to components of the respective pack-
  ages.

Airflow: This package contains models for multizone airflow and
   contaminant transport that are similar to models implemented
   in CONTAM.31 The models compute air flow between adjacent             31
                                                                           Dols, W. S. and G. N. Walton (2002,
   rooms and between rooms and the outside. Each room volume             November). CONTAM 2.0 user manual,
                                                                         multizone airflow and contaminant
   is assumed to be completely mixed. The driving force for the air      transport analysis software. Technical
   flow are pressure differences that can be induced, for example, by    Report NISTIR 6921, National Institute
                                                                         of Standards and Technology
   a flow imbalance of the HVAC system, density differences across
   large openings such as doors or open windows, stack effects in
   high rise buildings, and wind pressure on the building facade.
   The physics of the models in this package is described in Wetter
   (2006).32 However, this package is a new implementation that led      32
                                                                            Wetter, M. (2006, September). Mul-
   to simpler models and more robust simulations due to the use of       tizone airflow model in Modelica. In
                                                                         C. Kral and A. Haumer (Eds.), Proc. of
   the Modelica stream connectors33 that have been introduced in the     the 5-th International Modelica Conference,
   Modelica.Fluid package34 of the Modelica Standard Library.            Volume 2, Vienna, Austria, pp. 431–440.
                                                                         Modelica Association and Arsenal
BoundaryConditions: This package contains models to read TMY3            Research
  weather data and to compute boundary conditions, such as solar
                                                                         33
                                                                            Franke, R., F. Casella, M. Otter,
                                                                         M. Sielemann, H. Elmqvist, S. E. Matts-
  irradiations and sky temperatures.                                     son, and H. Olsson (2009, September).
                                                                         Stream connectors – an extension of
Controls: This package contains blocks that model continuous time        modelica for device-oriented modeling
  and discrete time controllers. There are also blocks that can be       of convective transport phenomena. In
  used to schedule setpoints.                                            F. Casella (Ed.), Proc. of the 7-th Interna-
                                                                         tional Modelica Conference, Como, Italy.
Fluid: This is the largest package of the library. It contains compo-    Modelica Association
                                                                         34
                                                                            Franke, R., F. Casella, M. Otter,
   nent models for air-based and water-based HVAC systems. The           K. Proelss, M. Sielemann, and M. Wet-
   package contains models such as chillers, cooling towers, heat        ter (2009, September). Standard-
   exchangers, flow resistances, valves and air dampers, mass flow       ization of thermo-fluid modeling in
                                                                         Modelica.Fluid. In F. Casella (Ed.),
   boundary conditions, pressure boundary conditions, pumps and          Proc. of the 7-th International Model-
   fans, sensors and energy storage. Simple component models are         ica Conference, Como, Italy. Modelica
                                                                         Association
   typically based on first principles, whereas models of more com-
   plex equipment typically use steady-state performance curves such
   as the ones used in EnergyPlus. In addition, differential equa-
   tions are added to deduce from the steady-state performance the
   transient behavior, such as due to evaporation of water on the coil
   surface of a direct evaporative cooling coil once the compressor is
   switched off. A recent description of these models can be found in
   Wetter et al. (2011).35                                               35
                                                                           Wetter, M., W. Zuo, and T. S. Nouidui
                                                                         (2011b, March). Recent developments
                                                                         of the modelica buildings library for
                                                                         building heating, ventilation and air-
                                                                         conditioning systems. In Proc. of the 8-th
                                                                         International Modelica Conference, Dres-
                                                                         den, Germany, pp. 266–275. Modelica
                                                                         Association
3   SCOPE                                                                                                        9



HeatTransfer: This package contains models for steady-state and dy-
  namic heat transfer through opaque constructions such as multi-
  layered walls. It also contains models for layer-by-layer heat trans-
  fer through fenestration systems that are similar to the algorithms
  of the WINDOW 6 program.36                                              36
                                                                            Mitchell, R., C. Kohler, L. Zhu,
                                                                          D. Arasteh, J. Carmody, C. Huizenga,
Media: This package contains different implementations for various        and D. Curcija (2011, January). THERM
  media. The media models in this package are compatible with             6.3 / WINDOW 6.3 NFRC simulation
                                                                          manual. Technical Report LBNL-48255,
  models of the Modelica.Media package, but the implementation is         Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory,
  in general simpler. This often leads to fewer nonlinear equations       Berkeley, CA; and Carli, Inc. (2006,
  and system models that are more robust. Due to the simplifica-          October). TARCOG: Mathematical Models
                                                                          for Calculation of Thermal Performance of
  tions, the media models of this package are accurate for a smaller      Glazing Systems with or without Shading
  temperature range than the models in Modelica.Media, but the            Devices. Amherst, MA: Carli, Inc
  smaller temperature range generally suffices for building HVAC
  applications.
Rooms: This package contains models for heat transfer in rooms
  and through the building envelope. Multiple instances of these
  models can be connected to create a multi-zone building model. To
  compute the air exchange between rooms and between a room and
  the exterior, the room models can be connected to multi-zone air
  exchange models from the package Buildings.Airflow. The room
  models can also be linked to models of HVAC systems that are
  composed of the components in the package Buildings.Fluid. A
  detailed model description can be found in Wetter et al. (2011).37      37
                                                                             Wetter, M., W. Zuo, and T. S. Nouidui
                                                                          (2011a, November). Modeling of heat
Utilities: This package contains utility models, such as for computing    transfer in rooms in the Modelica
  thermal comfort, for run-time data exchange with the Building           "Buildings" library. In Proc. of the 12-
                                                                          th IBPSA Conference, pp. 1096–1103.
  Controls Virtual Test Bed38 , or for computing psychometric prop-       International Building Performance
  erties. The package also contains various mathematical functions        Simulation Association
  that are used throughout the library. A package that allows inter-
                                                                          38
                                                                             Wetter, M. (2011b). Co-simulation of
                                                                          building energy and control systems
  preting Python code during run-time from a Modelica model is            with the building controls virtual test
  currently in development.                                               bed. Journal of Building Performance
                                                                          Simulation 4, 185–203
   The above packages also contain user’s guides, tutorials and exam-
ples. The user’s guides explain, for models of the respective package,
what their underlying assumptions, limitations and proper use are.
The tutorials provide step by step instructions for how to build large
system models, the examples illustrate different usages of models.
These examples range from small models where individual compo-
nents are tested and users can quickly understand, to whole building
simulations that contain thousands of component models.
   There is also a separate user guide39 that covers general informa-      LBNL (2012). User’s guide of the
                                                                          39


tion that is not specific to the use of individual sublibraries or mod-   modelica Buildings library

els. Discussed topics include how to get started, best practices, how
to post-process results using Python, work-arounds for problems and
how to develop new component and system models.
4   IMPLEMENTATION                                                                                               10



   In total, the Buildings library contains 236 models and blocks,
and 94 functions. The models, blocks and functions are used in 279
example models. The example models are included in the regression
tests that are explained in Section 5.2.


4   Implementation

4.1 Differentiability
The models of the Buildings library define systems of coupled dif-
ferential, algebraic and discrete equations. The differential algebraic
systems of equations (DAE) that define the physics of the various
components are formulated in such a way that the equations are once
continuously differentiable with respect to all variables, and that
the derivatives are bounded on compact sets. These properties are
necessary and sufficient to establish existence and uniqueness of a so-
lution to the differential equations defined by the model equations.40       40
                                                                               Coddington, E. A. and N. Levinson
Differentiability is also needed because model equations are differen-       (1955). Theory of ordinary differential
                                                                             equations. McGraw-Hill Book Company,
tiated during translation to reduce the index of the DAE system if it        Inc., New York-Toronto-London
is higher than one, and to compute the Jacobian matrix. In addition,
boundness of the derivative is needed to avoid situations where the
step size of Newton-based solvers for nonlinear equations shrinks to
zero.
   The implications of this differentiability requirement is that dis-
continuous functions, continuous but non-differentiable functions
and functions with infinite derivatives are approximated by differ-
entiable functions that have bounded derivatives on compact sets.
Discontinuous functions arise, for example, by if-then-else equations
that select empirical correlations for different ranges of model vari-
ables. Continuous but non-differentiable functions arise, for example,
when computing the minimum capacity flow rate in an effectiveness-
NTU heat exchanger model. Functions with infinite derivatives arise,
for example, in free convection heat transfer models that compute
h(∆T ) = k |∆T |1/3 , where h(·) is the convection coefficient, k > 0 is a
constant and ∆T is the temperature difference.
   In a small neighborhood around zero mass flow rate, steady-state
energy and mass balances are replaced by differentiable equations
in order to avoid singularities that can cause numerical problems if
the involved variables are the output of iterative solvers that compute
numerical approximations to these variables. For example, consider
a steady-state model of a heat exchanger that computes the enthalpy
difference between outlet and inlet as ∆h = Q̇/ṁ, where Q̇ is the heat
added to the medium and ṁ is the mass flow rate. Clearly, a neces-
sary condition for ∆h to be finite is Q̇/ṁ → 0 as ṁ → 0. However,
4   IMPLEMENTATION                                                                                                                   11



for some system models, computing Q̇ requires an iterative solu-
tion. Thus, Q̇ can only be approximated by some Q̇∗ (e), that satisfies
| Q̇(e) − Q̇| ≤ K e, where K > 0 is a constant and e > 0 is the solver
tolerance. This considerably complicates the treatment of zero flow
as the ratio needs to satisfy Q̇∗ (e)/ṁ → 0 as ṁ → 0. To guarantee
this behavior, we provide a special implementation of ∆h = Q̇/ṁ in a
reusable base class.
    Specifically, instead of implementing

    ∆h = Q̇/ṁ,                                                            (1)

we implemented

    ∆h , Q̇ φ(ṁδ , ṁ),                                                   (2)

with
                 
                  p(δ, x ),       for x ∈ [−δ, δ],
    φ(δ, x ) ,                                                             (3)
                 1/x,             otherwise,

where φ : R × R → R is a twice continuously differentiable function
that is bounded on compact sets. We constructed the function p : R ×
R → R in such a way that it satisfies

     p(δ, x )    = − p(δ, − x ),                                       (4a)
     p(δ, δ)     = 1/δ,                                               (4b)
    p0 (δ, δ)    = −1/δ2 ,                                             (4c)
      0
    p (δ, 0)     6= 0,                                                (4d)
     00                        3
    p (δ, δ)     = −2/δ ,                                              (4e)
                                                                                                       1                                  δ/x
 where p0 (·, ·) and p00 (·, ·) denote the first and second order par-                                            δ p(δ, x )
tial derivatives with respect to the second argument. The condition
                                                                                      δ φ(δ, x )
p0 (δ, 0) 6= 0 has been selected to avoid that the first derivative van-                               0
ishes at the origin, because a Newton solver that solves p(δ, x ) = 0
for x may compute the sequence xn+1 = xn − p(δ, xn )/p0 (δ, xn ).
                                                                                                     −1
    The function that we selected and that satisfies (4) is                                                 δ/x

                 x       2     3      1                                                                              −1         0    1
    p(δ, x ) ,     2
                     + x 3 x − 5 x3 + 7 x5 .                               (5)                                                 x/δ
                 δ       δ    δ      δ

Figure 1 shows the graph of this function. The term x/δ2 is used to                                Figure 1: Plot of δ φ(δ, x ).
ensure that the first derivative is non-zero around a neighborhood of
x = 0, and therefore by the Implicit Function Theorem, there exists
in a neighborhood of the origin an inverse function p−1 (δ, ·) that is
differentiable.41                                                                41
                                                                                    Polak, E. (1997). Optimization, Algo-
   Note that in (2), for ṁ(t) ∈ (−ṁδ , ṁδ ) \ {0}, energy is not con-         rithms and Consistent Approximations,
                                                                                 Volume 124 of Applied Mathematical
served. Therefore, ṁδ should be chosen small. However, ṁδ should               Sciences. Springer Verlag
4   IMPLEMENTATION                                                                                                12



not be too small compared to the design mass flow rate, as this will
cause φ(ṁδ , ṁ) to be large in magnitude near ṁ ≈ ±ṁδ , which may
lead to problems for numerical solvers. The default setting in the
Buildings library is ṁδ = 10−7 ṁ0 , where ṁ0 is the design mass flow
rate. At this low mass flow rate, the impact on the energy consump-
tion is negligible.
   To assist component model developers in the regularization of
these functions, the package Buildings.Utilities.Math provides
differentiable approximating functions for many formulations.42            42
                                                                             Note that Modelica simulation en-
                                                                           vironments can in general properly
                                                                           handle non-differentiabilities. How-
4.2 Class Hierarchy                                                        ever, a numerically sound treatment
                                                                           requires an event iteration that is com-
An individual implementation of this special treatment of conserva-        putationally costly. When formulating
                                                                           equations for physical phenomena, we
tion equations for each model would be cumbersome, error prone             therefore replaced non-differentiable
and expensive to maintain. We therefore implemented the Buildings          equations with approximations that are
library in such a way that generic, reusable base classes are provided     continuously differentiable.

that implement steady-state and dynamic conservation equations
for heat and mass transfer, as well as equations for flow resistances.
These base classes are compatible with, and in some cases based
on, models from the Modelica.Fluid package43 that are part of the          43
                                                                              Franke, R., F. Casella, M. Otter,
Modelica Standard Library.                                                 K. Proelss, M. Sielemann, and M. Wet-
                                                                           ter (2009, September). Standard-
   Such implementations of reusable base classes are provided for          ization of thermo-fluid modeling in
components with two and four fluid ports.44 For components with            Modelica.Fluid. In F. Casella (Ed.),
                                                                           Proc. of the 7-th International Model-
two fluid ports, Figure 2 shows the class hierarchy that is used to        ica Conference, Como, Italy. Modelica
implement these models. A similar class hierarchy is used for com-         Association
ponents with four fluid ports. In the figure, white components are
                                                                           44
                                                                              In Modelica, a fluid port is an inter-
                                                                           face for quasi one-dimensional fluid
base classes, while gray components are component models that can          flow. It is used to connect models that
be instantiated by users to build system models. A solid line is used      carry the same medium. The fluid port
                                                                           propagates pressure, mass flow rate,
to indicate object-inheritance, while a dashed line is used to indicate    enthalpy, species concentration and
object-instantiation. Due to space constraints, only a small part of the   trace substance concentrations among
object tree is shown.                                                      models.

   The three primitive building blocks are as follows:

ConservationEquation: This model provides conservation equations
  for energy, mass fractions and trace substances for components
  with any number of fluid ports. The conservation equations can
  be steady-state or dynamic. There is also a connector that allows
  adding heat or mass fractions into the components, which then
  participate in the conservation equation of the fluid. There is no
  pressure drop between the fluid ports.

StaticTwoPortConservationEquations: This class is similar to ConservationEquation.
   However, the component must have two fluid ports, and the con-
   servation equations are steady-state. For small mass flow rates, the
   approximating function p(ṁδ , ·) explained above is used to avoid
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Legend                                                                                  4
                                                                                                                       PartialTwoPort
                                                                                                                      Implements ports
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                A        Base class that cannot be instanciated
                                                                                                                        and medium,
                                                                                                                         provided by
                                                                                                                          Modelica
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                A         Ready-to-use model
                                                                                                                      Standard Library




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Class name
                                                                                                                 PartialTwoPortInterface
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Description
                                                                                                        + state variables at fluid ports
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                + Explanation of provided functionality




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                A                       B        B extends A
               ConservationEquations
                                                                                                                                                 PartialResistance
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     IMPLEMENTATION

                  Steady-state and
                                                                                                                                                  Base class used
                      dynamic                                                                                                                      by resistances                                                                               A                       B        B instanciates A
                    conservation                                         StaticTwoPortConservationEquations
                    equations for                                                    Steady-state                                                                                             FixedResistanceDpM
                 components with                                                    conservation                                                                                                Flow resistance
                   any number of                                                    equations for                                                                                                     for
                     fluid ports                                                  components with                                                                                                non-actuators                                                 ActuatorSignal
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           PartialTwoWayValve
                                                                                   two fluid ports                                                                                                                                                             Actuator input
+ steady-state conservation equations                                                                                                                                                + ∆p = f (ṁ)                            Adds pressure
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 signal and
+ dynamic conservation equations                           + steady-state conservation equations                                                                                                                              drop for valves
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 travel time
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    + ∆p = f (ṁ, φ)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    + control input y and y a




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                TwoWayLinear
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Two-way valve
                                                     PartialMixingVolume                                                                                                                TwoPortHeatMassExchanger
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  with linear
                                                          Instanciates                                                                                                                           Base class for                                                                                     opening
                                                         dynamic and                                                                                                                              devices that                                                                                   characteristics
                                                         steady-state                                                                                                                          add/remove heat
                                                                                                                                                                                                or moisture to                                                                           + φ = g(y a )
                                                         conservation
                                                           equations                                                                                                                             fluid stream

                                                                                                                                           replaceable instance,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          TwoWayExponential
                                                                                                                                           constrained by PartialMixingVolume
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Two-way valve
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   HeaterCoolerPrescribed                                                  with exponential
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Ideal                                                              opening
                                                                                     MixingVolume
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        heater/cooler                                                       characteristics
                                        MixingVolumeMoistAir                         Mixing volume
                                            Mixing volume                            with heat input,                                                                                                                                                                             + φ = g(y a )
                                            with heat input                            but no mass
                                             and moisture                             transfer other                                                                                                                HumidifierPrescribed
                                                 input                                than through                                                                                                                    Ideal humidifier
                                                                                        fluid ports                                                                                                                   or dehumidifier                                                   TwoWayQuickOpening
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Two-way valve
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             with quick
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     BoilerPolynomial                                                         opening
                                                                                     DelayFirstOrder                                                                        CoolingTower                                  Boiler with                                                      characteristics
                                                                                                                      RadiatorEN442_2                                        Base class for                              polynomial
                                                                                        First order                                                                                                                                                                             + φ = g(y a )
                                                                                           delay                           Radiator                                         cooling towers                             efficiency curve




                                                                                                                                                           FixedApproach                         YorkCalc
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Figure 2: Class inheritance and
                                                                                                                                                              With fixed                         With York
                                                                                                                                                               approach                         performance
                                                                                                                                                             temperature                           curve




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  instance diagram for part of the




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Buildings.Fluid package.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        13
4   IMPLEMENTATION                                                                                                14



    numerical problems near zero mass flow rate.

FixedResistanceDpM: This model computes, for an open thermo-
   dynamic system with two fluid ports, the pressure drop due to
   flow friction. The mass flow rate is computed as k = ṁ/ ∆p if
                                                               p

   |ṁ| > ṁt , where ṁt > 0 is a user parameter that indicates where
   turbulent flow starts. By default, ṁt > 0 is set to be 30% of the
   design mass flow rate, but this value is user-adjustable. The transi-
   tion from the turbulent to the laminar flow regime is also required
   to ensure that dṁ/d∆p has a bounded derivative near zero mass
   flow rate. To compute the pressure drop, the mass flow rate as
   opposed to the volume flow rate is used to decouple the computa-
   tion of the mass balances from the energy balances. In view of the
   small variation in density for building HVAC applications, and the
   inherent uncertainty in calculating pressure drop of flow networks,
   the introduced error is small.

These three primitive models are used as the basic building blocks to
implement models for heat exchangers, valves, fans and pumps. As
shown in Figure 2, such component models extend from the common
base class PartialTwoPortInterface, which implements variables to
access thermodynamic properties at the fluid ports. This is extended
by PartialResistance, which is the base class for models that are
used to compute flow resistance of pipes, chillers, boilers, valves and
air dampers. The model PartialTwoPortInterface is also extended
by TwoPortHeatMassExchanger, which is a core model of the library
that is extended to implement models, such as for a heater or cooler
with a prescribed rate of heat transfer (HeaterCoolerPrescribed),
a humidifier (HumidifierPrescribed), and a boiler with polynomi-
als for the efficiency curve (BoilerPolynomial). The conservation
equations in these models are all implemented using an instance of
PartialMixingVolume. This provides a means to add heat and ex-
change mass with a fluid volume that can be parametrized to use dy-
namic or steady-state conservation equations.45 These conservation         45
                                                                             For certain applications, or for certain
equations are provided by the primitive models ConservationEquations       models, approximating the dynamics
                                                                           by a first order response, as done by
and StaticTwoPortConservationEquations described above. The                an instantaneously mixed volume, is
model PartialMixingVolume is a partial model, which in Modelica            insufficient. In such a case, a model
                                                                           developer can implement a finite vol-
means that it cannot directly be used because it has fewer equations       ume model by extending the model
than unknowns. Rather, the model TwoPortHeatMassExchanger re-              PartialTwoPortInterface. For exam-

declares this model to be a MixingVolume, which means that mass            ple, this is how the U-tube borehole
                                                                           heat exchanger model was imple-
can only be exchanged through the fluid ports. However, compo-             mented.
nent model developers can replace this model with any model that
extends from PartialMixingVolume. For example, for a humidi-
fier which adds a prescribed amount of water vapor, the model
MixingVolume is not applicable as it does not allow adding water
4    IMPLEMENTATION                                                                                            15



vapor. Therefore, models that need to add or remove water vapor
can do so by redeclaring the instance as MixingVolumeMoistAir,
which contains an input port that allows adding or removing mass
to the control volume. In principle, MixingVolumeMoistAir can be
used for any model by setting the mass exchange to zero. How-
ever, MixingVolume provides a more efficient implementation than
MixingVolumeMoistAir if no mass is exchanged with the fluid.
   The model MixingVolume is also used in various other models, in-
cluding a model for a transport delay, approximated by a completely
mixed volume, and a model for a radiator, which uses a series of
MixingVolume to implement a dynamic model of a radiator, using the
heat transfer equations from the European Norm EN 442-2.
   All models for valves extend from the partial model PartialTwoWayValve.
This partial model implements the pressure drop of the valve based
on the flow function, which is defined as

                    V̇ (y) ρ/ ∆p
                             p
           Cv (y)                     ṁ(y)
   φ(y) =         =               =         ,                     (6)
                    V̇ (1) ρ/ ∆p
                             p
           Cv (1)                     ṁ(1)

i.e., the ratio of mass flow rate at the current valve position y di-
vided by the mass flow rate at a fully open valve at the same pres-
sure difference across the valve.46 PartialTwoWayValve extends            46
                                                                            For computing the mass flow rate,
PartialResistance and ActuatorSignal. ActuatorSignal provides             we assumed that the variation of mass
                                                                          density is negligible in view of the
the input for the actuator signal, and also an implementation that        other idealization of the model and the
gives users the option to approximate the travel time of the actuator.    uncertainty in user-selected parameter
                                                                          values.

               1                                    input signal

    position
                                                                          Figure 3: Opening position of a
                                                   filtered signal
                                                                          valve, computed using different
                                                   detailed motor
                                                                          models for the opening posi-
               0
                                                                          tion as a function of the input
                   0 100 200 300 400 500 600                              signal. The dotted line shows
                           time [s]
                                                                          the input signal. The dashed
                                                                          line shows the input signal fil-
   The travel time is approximated using a second order, critically
                                                                          tered by a filter with a rise time
damped low-pass filter. Using a filter often leads to a more robust
                                                                          of 100 seconds. The solid line
simulation, because a step change in the input signal is smoothened
                                                                          shows the output of a detailed
by the filter, and hence the flow network receives as an input a signal
                                                                          motor model with hysteresis
that is continuously differentiable in time. If the considered appli-
                                                                          and finite travel speed. The
cation has requirements on the transient response for which neither
                                                                          opening and closing time of the
the instantaneous opening nor the filtered opening is sufficient, then
                                                                          motor was set to 100 seconds,
one can use a detailed model of an actuator motor that has a hys-
                                                                          and the motor hysteresis was
teresis, and a finite opening and closing speed. This model, however,
                                                                          set to 0.1.
generates state events whenever the actuator motor starts or stops
adjusting its position, which can significantly increase the computing
time of large models. Figure 3 shows the input control signal (dot-
    4   IMPLEMENTATION                                                                                                            16



    ted), which is equal to the valve position if the valve is configured
    using an instantaneous opening, the valve position approximated by
    a filter (dashed) and the valve position modeled using the detailed
    actuator motor model (solid).
        The separation between base classes and ready-to-use compo-
    nent models has several advantages: Many component models share
    the same parameters, such as parameters that can be used to switch
    between steady-state or dynamic models. Developers can add new
    components by defining a minimum set of equations, because base
    classes already provide a numerically robust and efficient imple-
    mentation of steady-state and dynamic conservation equations of
    the medium that flows through the component. This leads to faster
    model development, and lower risk of introducing errors because
    many equations are reused from already tested base classes that
    are used across a range of models. Furthermore, code duplication
    is largely avoided which reduces maintenance costs. For example,
    the following code is sufficient to implement a heat exchanger with
    constant effectiveness that exchanges heat between two fluid streams
    according to Q̇(t) = e Q̇max (t), where e ∈ (0, 1) is the heat exchanger
    effectiveness and Q̇max (·) is the maximum possible heat transfer.
    Line 3 declares that the model extends from a base class that imple-
    ments an effective heat transfer model. This base class implements
    the four fluid ports and the two flow resistances for the two medium
    streams that flow through the heat exchanger. It computes quantities
    that are typically required in effectiveness models, such as the capac-
    ity flow rates. Lines 4 and 5 declare that the model should only com-
    pute sensible heat transfer. Lines 6 and 7 provide equations for the
    rate of heat transfer based on the variable QMax_flow which is com-
    puted in the base class. Lines 8 and 9 assign the rate of mass transfer
    to the variables mXi1_flow and mXi2_flow. This is required for the
    model to have an equal number of equations and variables. Lines 10
    and 11 declare the parameter for the heat exchanger effectiveness.
1  model C o n s t a n t E f f e c t i v e n e s s
2    " Heat e x c h a n g e r w i t h c o n s t a n t e f f e c t i v e n e s s "
 3   extends B u i l d i n g s . F l u i d . HeatExchangers . B a s e C l a s s e s . P a r t i a l E f f e c t i v e n e s s (
 4      s e n s i b l e O n l y 1 = true ,
 5      s e n s i b l e O n l y 2 = true ,
 6      Q1_flow = eps * QMax_flow ,
 7      Q2_flow = −Q1_flow ,
 8      mXi1_flow = z e r o s ( Medium1 . nXi ) ,
 9      mXi2_flow = z e r o s ( Medium2 . nXi ) ) ;
10   parameter Real eps ( min=0 , max=1 , u n i t ="1 " ) = 0 . 8
11      " Heat e x c h a n g e r e f f e c t i v e n e s s " ;
12 end C o n s t a n t E f f e c t i v e n e s s ;


        Because models extend from the same base class, a model can im-
5     VALIDATION                                                                                                  17



plement so-called replaceable models to allow replacing one model
with a similar one that is compatible. Once users understand what
physics is implemented by the base classes, it becomes faster to un-
derstand different implementations of component models that extend
from the same base class. As a drawback of this model hierarchy, the
learning curve for developers in understanding the library structure
is somewhat higher. However, we believe that this effort is offset by
the above advantages.


5     Validation

5.1 Component and system validation
Component and system models have been validated using empirical
validation, comparative testing and analytical verification. Empirical
validation, in which models are compared against measurements,
have been used to test the window heat transfer and transmitted
solar radiation.47 Comparative testing, in which results are compared     47
                                                                             Nouidui, T. S., M. Wetter, , and
with other simulators, has been used for the following models: In         W. Zuo (2012, August). Validation of
                                                                          the window model of the modelica
Nouidui et al. (2012)48 , we compared the optical properties and the      buildings library. In Proc. of SimBuild,
surface temperatures of window systems with results obtained by           Madison, WI. IBPSA-USA
                                                                          48
                                                                             Nouidui, T. S., M. Wetter, , and
the WINDOW 6 program.49 The building envelope model has also
                                                                          W. Zuo (2012, August). Validation of
been validated using BESTEST.50 Air flow rates for the multizone          the window model of the modelica
airflow models have been validated with results obtained by the           buildings library. In Proc. of SimBuild,
                                                                          Madison, WI. IBPSA-USA
CONTAM program.51 Analytical verification, in which results are           49
                                                                             Mitchell, R., C. Kohler, L. Zhu,
compared with exact solutions, is applicable for component models         D. Arasteh, J. Carmody, C. Huizenga,
for which analytical solutions can be derived for certain steady-state    and D. Curcija (2011, January). THERM
                                                                          6.3 / WINDOW 6.3 NFRC simulation
or transient boundary conditions. This type of validation has been        manual. Technical Report LBNL-48255,
used to validate most individual component models, such as for heat       Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory,
                                                                          Berkeley, CA
and mass transfer and storage, for flow resistance elements such as       50
                                                                             ASHRAE (2007). ANSI/ASHRAE
valves and pipes, for fan models and for radiosity transport models.      Standard 140-2007, Standard method
                                                                          of test for the evaluation of building
                                                                          energy analysis computer programs;
5.2    Regression Tests                                                   and Nouidui, T. S., K. Phalak, W. Zuo,
                                                                          and M. Wetter (2012, September).
Once models are validated, their example models and associated ref-       Validation and application of the room
erence results in the form of time series are included in the library     model of the modelica Buildings library.
                                                                          In Proc. of the 9-th International Modelica
and used for regression testing whenever a developer updates the          Conference, Munich, Germany, pp.
library. The regression tests will run all 279 example models and re-     727–736. Modelica Association
port various problems, such as translation errors, non-convergence of     51
                                                                             Wetter, M. (2006, September). Mul-
                                                                          tizone airflow model in Modelica. In
a model, or a change in results by more than a prescribed tolerance       C. Kral and A. Haumer (Eds.), Proc. of
compared to archived reference results. These comparisons to refer-       the 5-th International Modelica Conference,
ence results are essential to ensure that changes to base classes have    Volume 2, Vienna, Austria, pp. 431–440.
                                                                          Modelica Association and Arsenal
no inadvertent effects, or that developers do not introduce an error      Research
in already tested models. The scripts that run the regression tests are
included in the BuildingsPy Python package that is described below.
6   ASSOCIATED TOOLS                                                      18



6   Associated Tools

In some applications, models of this library need to be used within
an automated workflow, connected to legacy building simulation
programs, or connected to hardware. This section describes tools that
have been developed to support such applications.


6.1 Pre- and post-processing
To facilitate the automation of simulation, such as for parametric
studies, and to facilitate post-processing, we developed the Build-
ingsPy Python package. This package contains modules with func-
tions that allow changing from interpreted scripts parameters of
models and solvers, translating and simulating models, possibly with
the use of the Python multiprocessing package for parallel comput-
ing, and reading output files for further processing. For example,
after the simulation, time series can be read by a Python script for
subsequent visualization and statistical analysis.


6.2 Scripts for Regression Tests
The BuildingsPy package is also used to support developers in run-
ning regression tests. Python functions have been implemented that
scan the library for executable models, simulate these models using
parallel computing, and then compare the new simulation results
with archived reference results. If the deviation is larger than a pre-
scribed limit, then a plot will be generated that compares archived
versus new results, and the developer will be asked whether the new
results should replace the archived results or be rejected. Since there
are 330 models, blocks and functions in the library, these regression
tests have been shown to be critical in ensuring that developers do
not inadvertently introduce an error in validated code.


6.3 Co-simulation and Hardware-in-the-loop Simulation
For certain applications, such as to assess the interaction of facade
and HVAC control or to develop model-based control algorithms,
Modelica models need to be linked to other simulators such as Radi-
ance or to hardware, such as building automation systems or data ac-
quisition systems for closed loop run-time data exchange. To enable
such co-simulation and hardware-in-the-loop simulations, we have
been developing the software interfaces that are described below.
These interfaces augment the application programming interfaces
and model export facilities that are provided by the various Modelica
6   ASSOCIATED TOOLS                                                                                           19



simulation environments. The authors developed the following two
technologies:
   To couple Modelica models to other simulators for co-simulation,
such as to EnergyPlus or to MATLAB/Simulink, we developed the
Building Controls Virtual Test Bed (BCVTB) software.52 The BCVTB         52
                                                                           Wetter, M. (2011b). Co-simulation of
is a software environment that allows expert users to couple different   building energy and control systems
                                                                         with the building controls virtual test
simulation programs for co-simulation and for hardware-in-the-           bed. Journal of Building Performance
loop simulation. For example, the BCVTB allows users to simulate a       Simulation 4, 185–203
building in EnergyPlus while the HVAC and control systems are sim-
ulated in Modelica. The BCVTB is based on the Ptolemy II software
environment.53                                                           53
                                                                           Brooks, C., E. A. Lee, X. Liu,
   While the BCVTB has been primarily developed by LBNL in con-          S. Neuendorffer, Y. Zhao, and H. Zheng
                                                                         (2007, January). Ptolemy II – hetero-
junction with the Ptolemy II developers from the University of Cal-      geneous concurrent modeling and
ifornia at Berkeley, the MODELISAR project started with the goal         design in Java. Technical Report No.
                                                                         UCB/EECS-2007-7, University of Cali-
that dynamic system models of different software systems can be          fornia at Berkeley, Berkeley, CA
used together for an integrated simulation, for hardware-in-the-loop
simulation and to execute code on processors of embedded sys-
tems. This project resulted in the Functional Mockup Interface (FMI)
standard.54 FMI is an open, non-proprietary standard that defines        54
                                                                           MODELISAR Consortium (2010b,
C-header files to interact with the equations of a model or to per-      jan). Functional Mock-up Interface for
                                                                         Model Exchange (First ed.). MODELISAR
form co-simulations with other simulators. It also defines an XML        Consortium; and MODELISAR Consor-
schema that allows an importing tool to inquire information about        tium (2010a, oct). Functional Mock-up
                                                                         Interface for Co-Simulation (First ed.).
the model and its interface variables. The FMI interface is indepen-     MODELISAR Consortium
dent of the respective tool that exported the model or simulators,
which allows exchanging code in an interoperable format. Tools that
support FMI can import and/or export a simulator for co-simulation,
or a model for model exchange. The exported simulator or model is
called a Functional Mockup Unit (FMU). As of 2012, 34 modeling and
simulation environments support or plan to support FMI.55                55
                                                                              FMI (2012). Fmi tool support
   In 2012, LBNL released an FMI for co-simulation import inter-
face in EnergyPlus 7.1.56 Such an interface is currently being im-        EnergyPlus External Interface (2012,
                                                                         56


plemented in the BCVTB software, and work is ongoing to allow            May). External Interface(s) Application
                                                                         Guide, Guide for using EnergyPlus with
exporting EnergyPlus as an FMU for co-simulation. Benefits of the        External Interface(s), version 7.1
FMI link, as opposed to the existing simulator coupling through the
Simulator actor in the BCVTB, are better usability, error handling
and reporting.
   Figure 4 shows the different connection capabilities in the context
of simulators and hardware for buildings. Various Modelica simula-
tion environments allow the import and export of FMUs. This allows,
for example, to export an HVAC system from the Buildings library,
and import it into an EnergyPlus model. Conversely, a building en-
velope model can be exported from EnergyPlus and imported into
Modelica for the development of control sequences. From both envi-
ronments, FMUs can be exported for import into the BCVTB. From
6     ASSOCIATED TOOLS                                                                                                                                20



    Modelica              EnergyPlus               Building Controls
    simulation                                     Virtual Test Bed
    environment
                                                                                                                Figure 4: Connectivity be-
    FMU      FMU          FMU         FMU          FMU import     simulator   SystemCommand   BACnet   A/D      tween simulators and hardware
    import   export       import      export       actor          actor       actor           actor    actor
                                                                                                                through simulator export and
                                                                                                                import as an FMU, and through
                                                                                                                run-time data exchange with
                                           MATLAB/                              BACnet         analog/digital
                                                                                                                the Building Controls Virtual
                                                               Radiance
                                           Simulink,
                                           EnergyPlus,
                                                                                gateway        converter        Test Bed.
                                           ESP-r, and
                                           TRNSYS


    Legend
             Export and import as                                               BACnet         hardware
             an FMU for co-simulation                                           compatible     with analog
             Run-time data exchange                                             hardware       I/O




the BCVTB, they can be linked to MATLAB/Simulink and Radi-
ance for co-simulation. They can also be linked to hardware through
BACnet or analog/digital converters for real-time simulation and for
model-based controls.
   Modelica models from the Buildings library, exported as FMUs,
have also been used in the Learn High Performance Buildings inter-
active eLearning software.57 In this project, models are encapsulated                                           57
                                                                                                                  Deringer, J. J., J. E. Nahman, K. Hem-
as FMUs. Using the FMI interface, model parameters and inputs are                                               ing, M. Wetter, X. Pang, and M. Kon-
                                                                                                                stantoglou (2012, August). LearnHPB
set, the time stepping is controlled and model outputs are retrieved.                                           and eLAD - two related online eLearn-
This is implemented in a web-server which uses the simulations to                                               ing platforms for high performance
                                                                                                                buildings. Summer Study on Energy
compute realistic responses of building heat transfer, multizone air                                            Efficiency in Buildings, Pacific Grove,
exchange, HVAC systems, control systems and equipment faults,                                                   CA. ACEEE
and visualizes this response at a student’s interactive web browser
through WebGL.
7   EXAMPLE                                                                                                       21



7   Example

We will now present an example that illustrates how Modelica can
be used to implement, test and improve the performance of a user-
defined control sequence. The control sequence is for a cooling plant
with a water-side economizer. It contains a state graph with delay on
the state transitions that is used to enable and disable the water side
economizer, a continuous time on/off control with event detection
and hysteresis to enable and disable the chiller, and discrete time
control for the setpoint scheduling. The control sequence is imple-
mented by combining block-diagrams and a state graph with acausal
models of the physical components of the chilled water plant.
   The objective is to improve the energy efficiency of a chilled water
plant by optimizing the control setpoints. The chilled water plant
is used to cool a data center in San Francisco, CA, with a constant
cooling load of 500 kW.


7.1 Model of the plant
We analyzed two models, one with and one without a water-side
economizer (WSE). The WSE is a heat exchanger added to the wa-
ter loop of the chilled water plant to provide free cooling. Figure 5
shows the schematic model and the Modelica system model of the
chiller plant with WSE. The room of the data center was modeled us-
ing a mixed air volume with a heat source. Heat conduction and air
infiltration through the building envelope were neglected since the
heat exchange between the room and the ambient environment was
small compared to the heat released by the computers. The chiller
model is based on performance curves and has a variable speed com-
pressor. The cooling tower uses a performance curve to compute
the approach temperature at off-design conditions. The water-side
economizer is a steady-state heat exchanger model with constant
effectiveness of 0.8. The chilled water flow rate is variable and con-
trolled as described by (15) below. The supply air mass flow rate to
the data center is constant, and the supply air is cooled using a finite
element cooling coil model.


7.2 Model of the control algorithm
The control objective was to maintain the temperature of the supply
air to the room, while reducing energy consumption of the chilled
water plant. The control was based on the control sequence proposed
by Stein (2009).58 To simplify the implementation, we only applied         58
                                                                             Stein, J. (2009). Waterside econo-
the controls for the differential pressure of the chilled water loop,      mizing in data centers: Design and
                                                                           control considerations. ASHRAE
the setpoint temperature of the chilled water leaving the chiller, and     Transactions 115(2), 192–200
7   EXAMPLE                                                                                                                                    22




                                                                Cooling Tower
                                                                                                             Figure 5: Schematic diagram
                                                               Cooling Tower                                 and Modelica system model
                                                               Water Pump
                                                                                                             of the chilled water plant with
                                                               Twc
                                                                                                             WSE.
              WSE
                                                               Chiller


                               Tchw,ent
                                                       Bypass Valve

                                   Tws
                         Chilled Water
                         Pump                                  Cooling Coil
                                                   -

                                                                      Fan
                                                                      Tair,sup
                                                              Data Center Room

                                (a) Schematic diagram




                                                                                                          Cooling tower

                                                                                                                            Cooling
                                                                                                                            tower
                               Setpoint reset control
                                                                                                                            pump
                                                                                                             Expansion
                                                                                                             vessel



                                                                                                                                      T_wc


                    Chiller                                                      WSE                       Chiller
                    on/off
                    control




                                                                                                        T_chw,ent



                                                                                                        Control valve
                                WSE state graph


                                                                                                        T_ws


    Weather
    data
    reader                                                                             Chilled
                                                                                       water                    Cooling
                                                                                       pump                     coil




                                                                                          Data center                                 Supply
                                                                                          room                  T_air,sup             fan




                                                           (b) Modelica model
7   EXAMPLE                                                                                                            23



the chiller on/off control. For the system with WSE, there was an
additional enable/disable control for the WSE as recommended by
Taylor (2010).59 This control sequence was independent from the                 59
                                                                                  Taylor, S. T. (2010, October). Personal
other control sequences. The pump for the condenser water loop, the             communication on October 22, 2010

cooling tower fan and the supply air fan were running at constant
speeds.
   The chiller is switched on if

    Tchw,ent (t) > Tchi,set (t) + ∆Tchi,ban                               (7)

and switched off if

    Tchw,ent (t) ≤ Tchi,set (t),                                          (8)

where Tchw,ent (t) is the temperature of the chilled water entering the
chiller, Tchi,set (t) is the setpoint temperature of the chilled water leav-
ing the chiller, and ∆Tchi,ban = 2.2 K is the dead-band temperature to
prevent chiller short cycling.
   Figure 6(a) shows the state graph of the WSE control. The WSE is
enabled if

    ∆twse,o f f (t) ≥ 20 min,                                             (9)

and

    Tws (t) > 0.9 Twet (t) + ∆Tt (t) + ∆Tw (t),                         (10)

with temperatures in Kelvin, where ∆twse,o f f (t) is the time of the
WSE in the off status, Tws (t) is the temperature of the chilled water
leaving the cooling coil, Twet (t) is the wet bulb temperature, ∆Tt (t)
is the temperature difference between the water leaving the cooling
tower and the air entering the cooling tower, ∆Tw (t) is the temper-
ature difference between the chilled water leaving the WSE and the
condenser water entering the WSE. The condition (10) must remain
true for at least 20 min.
    The WSE is disabled if

    ∆twse,on (t) ≥ 20 min,                                              (11)

and

    Tws (t) < Twc (t) + ∆Twse,o f f ,                                   (12)

where ∆twse,on (t) is the time elapsed since the WSE was switched
on, Twc (t) is the return water temperature of the cooling tower and
∆Twse,o f f = 0.6 K is an offset temperature. The condition (12) must
remain true for at least 20 min.
7    EXAMPLE                                                                                                              24



   The state graph is implemented in the Modelica model graphically
as shown in Figure 6(b). On the left are the connectors for the con-
trol input signals, in the middle is the state graph and on the right
are signal conversions from boolean to real signals, followed by the
connectors for the output signals. In this simple state graph there
are two states represented by the oval icons. The states are “off” or
“on”. The curved arrow indicates that “off” is the initial state. The
horizontal bars are the transitions between the states. Each transition
must have exactly one preceding state and one succeeding state. The
transitions fire if a boolean expression, i.e., equations (10) and (12),
respectively, remains true for 1200 seconds. This optional wait time is
indicated by the red annotation to the right of the transitions.


                                   start         WSE off                                       Figure 6: State graph of the
                                                                                               WSE and its implementation in
    ∆twse,o f f (t) ≥ 20 min and                             ∆twse,on (t) ≥ 20 min and         Modelica.
    Tws (t) > 0.9 Twet (t) + ∆Tt (t) + ∆Tw (t)               Tws (t) < Twc (t) + ∆Twse,o f f


                                                 WSE on
                              (a) State graph of the WSE control.




               (b) Implementation of the state graph of the WSE control.
    The setpoint reset strategy is to first increase the differential pres-
7   EXAMPLE                                                                                                                         25



sure ∆p(t) of the chilled water loop to increase the chilled water
flow rate. If ∆p(t) reaches the maximum value and further cooling is
needed, then the chiller temperature setpoint Tchi,set (t) is reduced. If
there is too much cooling, then Tchi,set (t) and ∆p(t) will be changed
in the reverse direction. This control strategy is realized using the
trim and response logic60 , which is as follows: A cooling request is                     60
                                                                                            Taylor, S. T. (2007, June). Increasing
triggered if the input signal y(t) is larger than a threshold yδ . We                     efficiency with VAV system static
                                                                                          pressure setpoint reset. ASHRAE
used yδ = 0 and                                                                           Journal, 24–32

    y(t) = Tair,sup (t) − Tair,set ,                                               (13)

where Tair,sup (t) and Tair,set are the actual and the set point tem-
peratures of the supply air to the room. The sampling period was
∆t = 120 seconds. The control signal u(t) is computed as
          
          min(1, max(0, u(t − ∆t) + ∆u )), if y(t) ≥ y ,
                                             i                δ
   u(t) =                                                             (14)
          min(1, max(0, u(t − ∆t) − ∆ud )), otherwise,

where ∆ui = 0.03 and ∆ud = 0.03 are parameters for increasing and
decreasing u(t).
   As shown in Figure 7, the control signal u(t) is converted to con-
trol setpoints for ∆p(t) and Tchi,set (t) as
            
            ∆p                             u(t)
                  min + ( ∆pmax − ∆pmin ) x , if u ( t ) ∈ [0, x ],
   ∆p(t) =                                                          (15)
            ∆pmax ,                             otherwise,

and
                     
                     T
                        chi,max ,                                   if u(t) ∈ [0, x ],
    Tchi,set (t) =
                      Tchi,max − ( Tchi,max − Tchi,min ) u(t)− x , otherwise,
                                                           1− x
                                                                                   (16)

where x ∈ (0, 1) is a user-selected parameter, ∆pmin and ∆pmax
are the minimum and maximum differential pressure of the chilled
water loop, and Tchi,min and Tchi,max are the minimum and maximum
values of Tchi,set (t). For our experiments, we used x = 0.5, ∆pmin =                                                                   Tchi,max
                                                                                                                         Tchi,set (t)
25.94 kPa, ∆pmax = 129.7 kPa and Tchi,min = 5.56◦ C, which is the                          ∆pmax
minimum value in the range of performance curve of the selected                                    ∆p(t)
chiller. We varied the value of Tchi,max for a parametric study to find
the optimal value to reduce the system energy consumption. The                             ∆pmin                                        Tchi,min
details will be discussed in the following paragraph.                                              0             x                 1
   To optimize the control setpoints for system energy efficiency,                                              u(t)

we conducted a parametric study in which we varied two control
                                                                                          Figure 7: Chilled water loop
setpoints for the chilled water plants with and without WSE. One
                                                                                          differential pressure and chiller
parameter was the setpoint temperature for the supply air, Tair,set .
                                                                                          setpoint temperature reset.
7   EXAMPLE                                                                                                      26



We varied Tair,set from 18◦ C to 27◦ C, as these are the lower and up-
per bounds for the air supply temperatures recommended for data
centers.61 The other independent variable was the maximum value             61
                                                                              ASHRAE TC 9.9 (2011). Thermal
of the chiller setpoint Tchi,max , which we varied from 6◦ C to 26◦ C. We   guidelines for data processing environ-
                                                                            ments - expanded data center classes
used the ElectricEIR chiller model with a nominal cooling capacity          and usage guidance. White paper,
of 742 kW.                                                                  ASHRAE



7.3 System performance
The energy efficiency of the chilled water plant system was evaluated
using the power usage effectiveness (PUE).62 The PUE is the ratio of        62
                                                                              Belady, C., A. Rawson, J. Pflueger,
the total facility power usage, including power usage for the Informa-      and T. Cader (2008). Green grid data
                                                                            center power efficiency metrics: PUE
tion Technology (IT) and cooling system, divided by the power usage         and DCIE. Technical report, The Green
for the IT. A lower PUE indicates a more energy efficient cooling           Grid. White Paper

system.

    without WSE
                                                                            Figure 8: Power Usage Ef-
      with WSE                                                              fectiveness with and without
                   1                     1.14 1.18 1.21        1.27         water-side economizer.
                                          PUE

    Figure 8 and Figure 9 show the PUEs of the chilled water plant
systems with and without WSE for different values of Tair,set and
Tchi,max . Figures 9(a) and 9(b) show for systems with and without
a WSE a range of PUEs between 1.14 to 1.18 and between 1.21 to
1.27, respectively. Compared to a cooling plant without WSE and
Tchi,max = 10◦ C, an optimized WSE reduces the facility electrical
energy use by about 10%. For a 500 kW data center, at 0.2 $/kWh,
reducing the PUE by 10% yields a $90, 000 annual reduction in elec-
tricity costs.
    For both systems, increasing Tchi,max can significantly reduce the
PUE. There are two reasons for this. First, for both systems, the
chiller is more efficient when working at higher evaporator tem-
peratures. However, for a given air setpoint temperature Tair,set , there
is a maximum chilled water leaving temperature above which the
temperature difference across the cooling coil is insufficient to pro-
vide the required cooling. If the cooling provided by the cooling coil
is insufficient, then y(t), the difference between the actual and the
set point temperature of the supply air, is larger than zero. Then, it
follows from equation (14) that u(t) increases, and hence, it follows
from equation (16) that the setpoint of the chilled water leaving tem-
perature Tchi,set (t) decreases. Therefore, there is an upper bound for
Tchi,max above which a further increase does not yield higher system-
level efficiency because the chilled water is too warm, which will be
7   EXAMPLE                                                                                                                                                                                           27



compensated for by the trim and response logic. Second, for the sys-
tem with WSE, increasing Tchi,max , and hence Tchi,set (t), reduces the
PUE because by (7) and (8), this increases the hours when the chiller
is off.
    For both systems, increasing Tair,set also reduces the PUE if Tchi,max
is larger than a certain value. The reason is that a higher air sup-
ply temperature leads to an increase in chilled water temperature,
thereby increasing the coefficient of performance of the chiller and
the number of hours during which the economizer can be used.
    There are some oscillations on the vertical parts of the contour
lines, for example at PUE = 1.17 and 1.18 in Figure 9(a) and at
PUE = 1.23 to 1.25 in Figure 9(b). This is caused by the large val-
ues of ∆ui = 0.03 and ∆ud = 0.03 used by the trim and response
logic in equation (14). Further numerical experiments showed that
reducing the values of ∆ui and ∆ud led to smoother PUE contour
lines in Figure 9, but they caused over-heating and over-cooling of
the supply air to the room. Since the control objective was that the
temperature of the supply air Tair,sup (·) tracks the setpoint Tair,set , we
used ∆ui = 0.03 and ∆ud = 0.03.


                                                                                                                                                                         Figure 9: PUEs of chilled water
                    25                                                                                25
                                                                                                                                                                         plant systems with and without
                                                                                                                                                                  1.21
                                                                     1.14
                    20                                                                                20                                             1.22                WSE.
                                                                                                                                    1.23

    Tchi,max [◦C]                                                                     Tchi,max [◦C]
                                                      1.15
                                         1.16                                                               1.25        1.24
                    15                                                                                15
                            1.17
                    1.18
                    10                                                                                10
                                                                                                                                        1.26
                                                                                                                                1.27
                     18    19      20    21      22       23    24   25     26   27                    18     19   20      21    22       23    24      25   26     27
                                                Tair,set [◦C]                                                                   Tair,set [◦C]

                                        (a) With WSE                                                               (b) Without WSE

   Figure 10 shows for the system with WSE the outside wet bulb
temperature Twet (t) and the hours of corresponding chiller status for
a whole year. When Tchi,max = 6◦ C, the chiller was running for the
whole year to meet the low setpoint temperature (Figures 10(a) and
10(b)). That explains why the PUEs for Tchi,max = 6◦ C are the highest
among the system with WSE in Figure 9(a).
   Comparing Figure 10(a) with Figure 10(b) and Figure 10(c) shows
that increasing Tchi,max from 6◦ C to 22◦ C, or increasing Tair,set from
18◦ C to 27◦ C alone does not increase the hours when the chiller is
off. Both setpoints need to be increased to achieve a reduction in
chiller operating hours.
The Modelica models can also provide detailed transient information
of the chilled water plant control. Figure 11(a) shows the control
signals of the system with WSE under two different control setpoints
7                      EXAMPLE                                                                                                                                                        28




                      0.16                                                                       0.16
                                                                                                                                                      Figure 10: Annual frequency
                              Tchi,max = 6◦C                                                             Tchi,max = 6◦C                               distributions of the chiller sta-
                      0.14                                      on                               0.14                                      on
                              Tair,set = 18◦C                                                            Tair,set = 27◦C
                                                                off                                                                        off        tus as a function of the wet bulb


Normalized time [-]                                                        Normalized time [-]
                      0.12                                                                       0.12
                      0.10                                                                       0.10                                                 temperature for different con-
                      0.08                                                                       0.08
                                                                                                                                                      trol setpoints. All figures are for
                      0.06                                                                       0.06
                                                                                                                                                      the system with WSE.
                      0.04                                                                       0.04
                      0.02                                                                       0.02
                      0.00                                                                       0.00
                          0         5             10       15         20                             0         5             10       15         20
                                               Twet [◦C]                                                                  Twet [◦C]

                                                (a)                                                                        (b)


                      0.16                                                                       0.16
                              Tchi,max = 22◦C                                                            Tchi,max = 22◦C
                      0.14                                      on                               0.14                                      on
                                          ◦
                              Tair,set = 18 C                                                            Tair,set = 27◦C
                                                                off                                                                        off




Normalized time [-]                                                        Normalized time [-]
                      0.12                                                                       0.12
                      0.10                                                                       0.10
                      0.08                                                                       0.08
                      0.06                                                                       0.06
                      0.04                                                                       0.04
                      0.02                                                                       0.02
                      0.00                                                                       0.00
                          0         5             10       15         20                             0         5             10       15         20
                                               Twet [◦C]                                                                  Twet [◦C]

                                                (c)                                                                        (d)



on a cold day (January 14). On the cold day, the WSE can provide
all the cooling needed and the chiller can be off for the whole day if
the setpoint temperatures are high. With low setpoint temperatures,
the chiller has to be on to cool the chilled water to the low value of
Tchi,set (t). The small oscillations of ∆p(t) are caused by the trim and
response logic which samples every 120 seconds.
   Figure 11(b) shows the same variables for June 30, a hot day. With
low setpoint temperatures, the chiller was on all the time. With high
setpoint temperatures, the chiller was off in the morning. As the out-
side wet bulb temperature raises during the morning, the rate of heat
transfer of the economizer is reduced. This is compensated for by
an increase of the pressure setpoint ∆p(t) for the chilled water loop,
thereby increasing the chilled water flow rate. In the early afternoon,
this is insufficient, leading to a reduction of the chilled water set
point Tchi,set (t), according to Figure 7, after which the chiller switches
on and remains on until the early evening.
