Parallelizing quantum circuit synthesis
Olivia Di Matteo1,2 and Michele Mosca2,3,4,5

arXiv:1606.07413v2 [quant-ph] 14 Oct 2016

1

Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, Canada
Institute for Quantum Computing, Waterloo, Canada
3
Department of Combinatorics and Optimization, University of Waterloo, Waterloo,
Canada
4
Perimeter Institute for Theoretical Physics, Waterloo, Canada
5
Canadian Institute for Advanced Research, Toronto, Canada
2

E-mail: odimatte@uwaterloo.ca, mmosca@uwaterloo.ca

Abstract. Quantum circuit synthesis is the process in which an arbitrary unitary
operation is decomposed into a sequence of gates from a universal set, typically one
which a quantum computer can implement both efficiently and fault-tolerantly. As
physical implementations of quantum computers improve, the need is growing for tools
which can effectively synthesize components of the circuits and algorithms they will
run. Existing algorithms for exact, multi-qubit circuit synthesis scale exponentially
in the number of qubits and circuit depth, leaving synthesis intractable for circuits
on more than a handful of qubits. Even modest improvements in circuit synthesis
procedures may lead to significant advances, pushing forward the boundaries of not
only the size of solvable circuit synthesis problems, but also in what can be realized
physically as a result of having more efficient circuits.
We present a method for quantum circuit synthesis using deterministic walks. Also
termed pseudorandom walks, these are walks in which once a starting point is chosen,
its path is completely determined. We apply our method to construct a parallel
framework for circuit synthesis, and implement one such version performing optimal T count synthesis over the Clifford+T gate set. We use our software to present examples
where parallelization offers a significant speedup on the runtime, as well as directly
confirm that the 4-qubit 1-bit full adder has optimal T -count 7 and T -depth 3.

Keywords: Quantum information, quantum circuits, high-performance computing,
parallel computing
1. Introduction
Quantum computers, like their classical counterparts, will require a compiler which can
translate from a human-readable input or programming language into operations which
can be executed directly on quantum hardware. Circuit synthesis is an integral part of

Parallelizing quantum circuit synthesis

2

the compilation process. Given an arbitrary quantum circuit C and a universal gate set
G, one seeks to find a decomposition
Uk Uk−1 · · · U2 U1 = C,

Ui ∈ G,

(1)

where k represents the depth of the circuit. A myriad of algorithms currently exist to
find such a decomposition [1–15]. They are generally divided into two classes, those
which synthesize approximately (i.e. ||Uk · · · U1 − C|| < ) and others which synthesize
exactly. Some procedures work for a single qubit, whereas others have been generalized
to multiple qubits. Most of these algorithms were designed to work over the Clifford+T
universal gate set, though other gate sets such as the V -basis have also been studied
[5, 6].
Many of the algorithms which perform exact synthesis fall victim to the fact that
the time and space used depend exponentially on both the number of qubits and the
depth of the circuit in question. Even on a reasonably fast machine, synthesis of circuits
with more than a handful of qubits and layers of depth becomes intractable.
In this work, we propose a method of circuit synthesis based on a heuristic search
technique commonly used in cryptanalysis: collision finding based on deterministic, or
pseudorandom walks. These are walks through a search space such that once a starting
point is chosen, the path is completely determined. More generally, we show how we can
use deterministic walks to traverse the space of possible circuits of a given depth and find
solutions to the synthesis problem. A key ingredient in our method is a mapping from the
unitary operators constructed from the gate set G to binary strings of a constant length,
and a suitable mapping back to the set of unitary operators. When such mappings are
defined, we can synthesize circuits over any universal gate set, on any number of qubits,
by applying any existing walk method which can search the space.
The structure of this article is as follows. We begin in Section 2 with a discussion
of deterministic walks, and how we can map quantum circuit synthesis to these types
of problems. The subsequent sections pertain to our choice of implementation of one
such method, namely parallel circuit synthesis. In Section 3 we briefly lay out the
procedure for parallel synthesis and provide a runtime complexity estimate, detailing
the important parameters which affect the scaling of our algorithm. Section 4 introduces
our software implementation, pQCS, which performs optimal T -count synthesis using
parallel search. Section 5 contains the numerical results of large-scale experiments run
on a Blue Gene/Q supercomputer. Here we showcase the significant advantages afforded
to us by parallelization. We conclude in Section 6 and suggest avenues of future research
on this topic.
2. Walking through circuits
Consider a hash function h : D → R, typically considered to operate over binary strings.
If h is a good hash function, then for an arbitrary input x ∈ D, the value h(x) = y ∈ R
will be in practice indistinguishable from a random output. Suppose there exists another

Parallelizing quantum circuit synthesis

3

function r : R → D, unrelated to h, which maps elements of its range back to the domain
(such a function is commonly termed a reduction function). Repeatedly applying r ◦ h
to an input will produce a trail of points scattered throughout D. However, once the
initial input is chosen, the progression of the trail is completely determined, hence we
favour the term deterministic rather than pseudorandom walk even though the path of
the walk appears random due to the natures of h and r.
Such determinism has led to a set of algorithms with a variety of applications. One
well-known variation is rainbow tables [16], which are used for finding pre-images of hash
functions (conventionally with the intention of cracking passwords). Collision finding in
one hash function, or claw finding between two functions has also been accomplished in
parallel using deterministic walks [17], and was used to find collisions in double DES
[18].
Deterministic walks are advantageous due to their low storage requirement: one
need only store the starting point of a walk, its ending point, and the number of
intermediate steps, whereas conventional search techniques would store the value of
every point computed throughout.

011100101010101011011101101...

1001101110111011000111...

Figure 1. A schematic diagram showing the process of walking over circuits. Binary
strings are mapped to products of unitary matrices over the gate set G via some
correspondence µ. The product of these matrices is then mapped via ν back to a
binary string, which is then passed through a hash function h. Repeated application
of h ◦ ν ◦ µ allows us to traverse the set of possible circuits in a pseudorandom fashion.

With this in mind, we show how one can map the problem of circuit synthesis to
a problem that can be solved using an algorithm based on deterministic walks. We
have, as per (1), a product constructed from the universal gate set G. It is possible to
specify a unique way of encoding the information about {U1 , . . . , Uk } into binary strings
{b1 , . . . , bk } of equal length ` (where we assume ` is sufficiently long as to encompass
all the information described in what follows). Suppose G contains a number of singleand two-qubit gates. If we enumerate all the gates in G, then for each Ui we might use
a few bits to identify all the constituent gates, and maybe a few more to specify if we

Parallelizing quantum circuit synthesis

4

should use their Hermitian conjugates. We will also need to indicate on which qubit(s)
they act. Furthermore, there must be some space to indicate controls and targets where
appropriate. Given any gate set, we can find a way of doing this such that every possible
Ui can be represented by a unique string bi . Then, the concatenation (bk | · · · |b1 ) will
be a unique string of length k` representing the product of unitaries Uk · · · U1 .
We can perform a deterministic walk over unitary matrices as follows; this process is
displayed graphically in Figure 1. Let us define a function µ which maps a binary string
of length k` to a unitary matrix over a specified gate set G. Then define a mapping ν
from the unitaries over G back to binary strings {0, 1}∗ . Finally, choose a good hash
function h from {0, 1}∗ to strings of length k` (this may be a simple hash function, or
a combination of hash and reduction-type functions). Repeatedly applying h ◦ ν ◦ µ
to a randomly chosen binary string of length k` will allow us to traverse products of
unitaries in a pseudorandom fashion; we can then use this to search the space of possible
solutions to (1).
3. Parallel circuit synthesis
Once we have mappings as proposed in Section 2, we can reformulate the circuit synthesis
problem as a problem which can be solved using search algorithms based on deterministic
walks. We specifically implemented one which performs parallel claw finding. Let
h1 : D1 → R and h2 : D2 → R be two hash functions. A claw between h1 and h2 is a
pair of inputs x1 ∈ D1 , x2 ∈ D2 such that
h1 (x1 ) = h2 (x2 ).

(2)

This is, in a sense, a collision search between two functions.
Our interest in claw finding stems from recent work on circuit synthesis using a
meet-in-the-middle (MITM) approach [12]. The motivation for that work is as follows.
One can of course find a decomposition of (1) by brute force, computing all possible
combinations starting from depth 1 up until a solution is found. Let ξ represent the
number of unitaries having depth 1. Typically ξ will depend exponentially on the
number of qubits, n. Then, the runtime for brute force synthesis of a circuit with depth
k takes time O(ξ k ). A MITM approach achieves a roughly square-root speedup over
this, accomplished by dividing the synthesis equation in half:
Ud k e · · · U1 = Ud†k e+1 · · · Uk† C,
2

Ui ∈ G.

(3)

2

Databases of unitaries having the form of each side of (3) are sequentially constructed
(starting from depth 1), stored in binary trees, and then searched through until a suitable
decomposition is found.
 k Thisreduces
 the size of the search space by a square root factor,
d2e
d k2 e
yielding runtime O ξ log ξ
, where the log factor is picked up due to the binary
search.
To parallelize circuit synthesis, we build on the principles of the MITM algorithm.
Rather than searching through static binary trees, we search the space in parallel,

Parallelizing quantum circuit synthesis

5

adapting a search technique originally developed for cryptanalysis [17]. Though our
runtime will retain the exponential dependence on n and dk/2e, it scales inversely with
the number of processors, allowing us to tackle larger problems which were infeasible
using previous methods, as well as speed up the synthesis of some known circuits. We
provide a brief description of the algorithm here as it pertains specifically to circuit
synthesis. For a more detailed description, the reader is referred to [17] or [19].
Recall (3), and for simplicity, let us define
V := Ud k e · · · U1 ,

(4)

W := Ud†k e+1 · · · Uk† C,

(5)

2

2

as representing the left and right sides of this equation. Define a suitable mapping
between unitary matrices and binary strings of length k` as in Section 2. Then let V 0
represent the set of binary strings that are of the form V , and likewise W those of the
form W . When k is odd, V 0 and W may differ in size by a factor of ξ. In this case, we
0
, and consider V = Vi0 independently
partition V 0 into equal sized chunks V00 , . . . , Vξ−1
(a search can then be executed with each Vi0 sequentially or in parallel, adding another
layer of parallelism to the implementation). When k is even, we simply let V = V 0 .
Let N = {0, 1}k` . Define functions z1 : N → N and z2 : N → N . One way these
functions might be implemented is by converting the input string into a sequence of
unitary matrices (in V for z1 and W for z2 ), computing their product, deriving a new
binary string with the information about each of the matrix elements, and then running
that string through a known hash function so that the outputs of both functions are in
the same space and in practice appear to be random.
Let us define a ‘super’ function f : N ×{1, 2} → N ×{1, 2} such that one application
of f is a single step in the deterministic walk, i.e. f (x, b) = zb (x). Finding a claw between
z1 and z2 is now equivalent to finding a collision in f with distinct values for b, i.e. we
must find two inputs x1 and x2 such that
f (x1 , 1) = f (x2 , 2).

(6)

Consider m processors all having access to a shared memory. We will denote some
fraction θ of points in N as marked, or distinguished. Every processor chooses a random
starting pair (n0 , b0 ) in N × {1, 2}. Repeatedly applying f produces a trail through the
space of possible circuits, which roughly half the time will produce a part of (3) which
is an element of V, and the other half of the time will produce an element of W. The
trail continues until the next input, say xd , is a distinguished point. The trail is then
terminated.
The collection of found distinguished points is stored in the shared memory.
Distinguished points are stored as a triple consisting of the first pair (n0 , b0 ), the last pair
(nd , bd ), and the value d, which is the number of steps taken to reach the distinguished
point. When a processor finishes its trail, it will attempt to add its distinguished point
to the shared memory. If it sees that a trail ending at the given point is not present
in this shared memory, it will insert it and then begin a new trail. However, if it sees

Parallelizing quantum circuit synthesis

6

...

...

...

...

...

...

that there is already a triple in storage which ended at the same distinguished point but
had a different starting point, it means that somewhere along the way these two trails
must have merged. The processor then takes the starting points of these two trails, and
traces back through them to locate the merge point.

Figure 2. Possible ways two trails can merge. Let f and g be two functions between
which we want to find a claw. (Left) One trail starts before the other. (Centre) The two
trails merge after performing the same function, i.e. a collision f (x1 ) = f (y3 ). (Right)
The two trails merge after performing a different function, i.e. a claw f (x1 ) = g(y3 ).

There are a number of possibilities here, as depicted in Figure 2. First, it could
be that one trail started “before” the other, i.e. the merge point was at the beginning
of the shorter trail. Another possibility is that when the trails merged, both had just
performed z1 , or both had just performed z2 . Even if the inputs were different, this
case does not provide us with a solution to the problem at hand. The final case is that
immediately before they merged, one trail performed z1 and one performed z2 ; it is only
in this final case that we have found a solution. With the information about the inputs
in the step just before the collision, we can extract the unitary matrices from the binary
string, and have fully synthesized our circuit.
The runtime complexity of this algorithm can be estimated by applying the
parameters of our problem directly to that in [17]. The size of the spaces V 0 and
W are
k
k
N 0 = ξd 2 e, N = ξb 2 c.
(7)
V

W

Our algorithm then scales as
1 k
k
1 1
TQCS ∝ ξ d 2 e+ 2 b 2 c √
τ,
wm

(8)

where w is the number of distinguished points that can be held in memory. The
parameter τ is the execution time for a single iteration of z1 or z2 , the bulk of which
will likely be spent performing matrix multiplication. Let us assume in the worst case
that we are taking the product of d k2 e 2n × 2n unitaries using a multiplication algorithm
which scales as (2n )α , where α is some constant, typically 2 < α ≤ 3. Thus, we obtain

Parallelizing quantum circuit synthesis

7

our final estimate
 
k
1 k
1
k
1
+
(d
e
b
c)
.
TQCS ∝ 2 ξ 2 2 2 √
wm 2
αn

(9)

As previously mentioned, this time is still exponential in the number of qubits as well as
the depth of the circuit. We also note that it is often the case that matrix multiplication
can be parallelized, or that some specific properties of the implementation at hand (such
as sparsity) can be leveraged so as to improve the scaling. What is key here is that the
runtime benefits from being inversely proportional to the number of processors and
available memory.
4. Implementation details
4.1. Optimal T -count synthesis
The synthesis algorithm we chose to apply our approach to is the optimal T -count
algorithm presented in [13]. Such an algorithm is relevant as in many state-of-the-art
methods for fault-tolerant quantum computation, T gates are considered to be expensive
to implement due to the need to distill magic states (see, for example, [20]).
Let Pn represent the n-qubit Pauli group.
We reshuffle and rewrite the
decomposition of a circuit C as
eiφ R(Pt ) · · · R(P1 )D = C,

(10)

where t is the T -count, D is a Clifford, Pj ∈ Pn , and


iπ
iπ
1
1
1 + e 4 I2n +
1 − e 4 Pj .
(11)
R(Pj ) =
2
2
It thus suffices to find a set of t Paulis and a Clifford which will satisfy (10) up to a
global phase. The dependence on the global phase can also be removed by using the
channel representation of every matrix in the above equation:
\
\b
b
R(P
t ) · · · R(P1 )D = C,

(12)

where the channel representation of some matrix U is the matrix with coefficients

bij = 1 Tr Pi U Pj U † , Pi , Pj ∈ Pn .
U
(13)
n
2
The channel representation of an n-qubit unitary has dimension 4n × 4n , with each row
and column being indexed by a Pauli operator.
Using the optimal T -count algorithm has afforded us with a number of advantages.
First of all, the T -count formulation allows us to represent each unitary matrix in the
sequence as a list of n-qubit Paulis. With binary symplectic representation we can
then represent each Pauli directly as a binary string, which leads to a very simple
mapping with which we can perform our deterministic walks. Another strong point
of the algorithm is that the channel representations of R(P ) for P ∈ Pn are sparse
matrices. Thus, we were able to implement a sparse matrix multiplication algorithm

Parallelizing quantum circuit synthesis

8

which allows us to very quickly compute most matrix products, despite the channel
representations having dimension 4n × 4n .
We can apply (8) and (9) to the optimal T -count synthesis to obtain a runtime
estimate. Each R(P ) contributes a single T gate to the circuit, and can be considered
as a single layer of depth in this implementation. Thus, we have that ξ = 4n − 1, as all
Paulis save for the identity are valid choices. Our estimate for the runtime is thus
 
t
n(2α+2d 2t e+b 2t c) 1 1
√
.
(14)
TQCS−T ∝ 2
wm 2
4.2. Computer specifications
We implemented the optimal T -count version of the parallel algorithm in C++11. It
is called pQCS (parallel quantum circuit synthesis), and is available for download
and research use at https://qsoft.iqc.uwaterloo.ca/#software. Parallelization was
accomplished using the Boost.MPI compiled library [21]. A scaled down version of
pQCS which uses only OpenMP for parallelization (and can be run on a standard
multi-core personal computer) is also available in the above package.
pQCS was extensively tested on two large-scale machines. The OpenMP-only
version was tested on SHARCNET’s Orca using a single node with up to 16 processors
at 2.2GHz speed. The MPI version was tested on Scinet’s Blue Gene/Q (BG/Q)
supercomputer, which has 65536 processors at 1.6GHz speed. The largest test we have
run to date involved a total of 8192 cores. All results below are from trials on the BG/Q.
A flowchart and description of the distribution of work in the MPI version is presented
in Figure 3.
5. Results
5.1. Determining effective simulation parameters
pQCS has a number of tunable parameters. In what follows we will synthesize a known
circuit, the Toffoli gate, and explore the scaling of our algorithm.
In the original description of the parallel collision finding algorithm [17], each
processor was responsible for performing not only the search for a distinguished point,
but also storing it and subsequently checking the validity of any possible solutions; it is
from this setup that the heuristic runtimes are derived. In pQCS, however, processors
are divided into three categories (as per Figure 3) which communicate via MPI. Worker
processors perform deterministic walks and generate distinguished points. Distinguished
points are collected and stored in-core on collector processes. Each collector has access
to a number of verifier processors, to which pairs of walks are sent for verification when
the possibility of a claw occurs. The parameters m and w may not necessarily depend
then on the total number of processors, but rather on the number of processors in one
or more of the different classes. For example, w will depend solely on the number of

Collectors
Veriﬁers

Figure 3. A flowchart of work distribution for the version of pQCS run on the Blue Gene/Q. Worker processors perform walks and
generate distinguished points. These are funneled through a head worker to a head collector processor, which then distributes the points
amongst all the collectors for processing and storage. Each collector has access to a number of verifiers. Collectors which find pairs of
walks ending at the same distinguished point distribute the pairs to their verifiers to check for a claw.

Workers

Inputs:
Parallelizing quantum circuit synthesis
9

Parallelizing quantum circuit synthesis

10

collectors, whereas we expect m to be a function of the number of workers, assuming a
sufficient number of collectors and verifiers are in place.
Average synthesis time for Toffoli gate on BGQ (100 trials)
Average synthesis time (s)

1024 cores

2048 cores

325
300
275
250
225
200
175
150
125
100
75
50

V=C
V = 2C

0.0625

0.125

0.1875

0.25

0.0625

0.125

0.1875

0.25

Proportion of collector nodes

Figure 4. Variation of the number of collectors and verifiers when synthesizing the
Toffoli gate. The fraction of distinguished points was set at 1/4. The legend V = C
indicates equal amounts of collectors and verifiers, whereas V = 2C indicates two
verifiers per collector. We find that the optimal number of collectors seems to be
about 1/8 the total number of processors, and the number of verifiers to be twice that,
at 1/4 the total number.

First, we focus on how many collectors and verifiers we should use. We chose two
values for the total number of cores, 1024 and 2048. We then varied the fraction of nodes
designated as collectors in increments of 1/16, from 1/16 to 1/4 the total (values outside
this range clearly yielded inferior results). For each fraction of collectors, we either used
the same, or double the number of verifiers. The results of these trial runs are shown
in Figure 4. In all these trials we let 1/4 of the points in the space be designated as
distinguished (later we will fine-tune this parameter as well). Each point is the average of
100 independent trials. We find that for both total quantities of processors, the optimal
number of collectors is 1/8 the total number, and for verifiers 1/4 the total. When
more than 3/8 of the total processes are being used on storage and verification, there
are not enough workers to perform the deterministic walks. On the other hand, when
there are too many workers, each collector must store and process a larger collection of
distinguished points each time. Furthermore, more time will be spent by the workers
gathering and sending the increased quantity of distinguished points.
With this knowledge, we then tested the Toffoli with varying number of cores.
Again, we let 1/4 of the points be distinguished and take the average of 100 independent
trials. The results are shown in Figure 5. We see clearly here the expected inverse
dependence on the number of processors as predicted by (8). We do note that there is
significant deviation from the expected trend when we reach 8192 cores. We suspect
that for a problem of this size, the parallel overhead and communication costs outweigh
the potential benefits of using this many cores.
Finally, we investigate how the runtime varies with the fraction of distinguished

Parallelizing quantum circuit synthesis

11

Average synthesis time for Toffoli gate on BGQ (100 trials)
Average synthesis time (s)

500
450
400
350
300
250
200
150
100
50
256 512

1024

2048

4096

8192

Cores

Figure 5. Varying the total number of cores when synthesizing the Toffoli gate. We
used 512 collectors and 1024 verifiers with 1/4 of the points distinguished. Data follows
the inverse trend line quite closely until around the 4096 core mark. After this point,
it is likely that the overhead and communication costs are too large for a problem of
this size.

points, θ. In the case of the Toffoli, the amount of available memory using the above
number of processors on the BG/Q is significantly greater than that required to store
even the entire space. Variation of this parameter is thus somewhat contrived for such a
(relatively) small problem. In this case we would expect an inverse dependence on θ (see
the Appendix for more details). We ran 100 trials on 4096 processors (512 collectors and
1024 verifiers) using fractions of distinguished points {1/2, 1/4, 1/8, 1/16, 1/32}.
The results are displayed in Figure 6, where we see the expected inverse dependence.
We also report here our best synthesis times for the Toffoli gate, clocking in at roughly
26s on average. To fully explore the effects of this parameter (and more importantly the
dependence on the available memory w), we would need to use a much larger circuit.

Average synthesis time (s)

Average synthesis time for Toffoli gate on BGQ (100 trials)
300
260
220
180
140
100
60
20
1/32

1/16

1/8

1/4

1/2

Fraction of distinguished points

Figure 6. Varying the fraction of distinguished points while synthesizing the Toffoli
gate. As the size of the search space is much less than the available memory, we see
roughly the expected inverse dependence on the fraction of distinguished points.

Parallelizing quantum circuit synthesis

12

5.2. Benchmarking known circuits
Some of the largest circuits which were directly synthesizable by both the original MITM
algorithm and optimal T -count algorithm were those with T -count 7 on 3 qubits [12,13].
There are a number of such circuits, shown in Figure 7. Using our knowledge from
optimization of parameters in the previous section (4096 cores, 1/2 points distinguished,
512 collectors and 1024 verifiers), we obtain the synthesis times reported in Table 1. We
note that at roughly 25s, these times are a marked improvement over those reported
in [19], which were greater than 4 minutes. This highlights the advantage of using many
processors, and is a promising sign that we will be able to synthesize circuits which are
much larger in a reasonable amount of time.
Toffoli

Peres

Fredkin

Quantum OR

Negated Toffoli

X
X
X

X

X
X

X

Figure 7. Circuit diagrams for the five 3-qubit circuits with T -count 7 which we
synthesized.

Circuit
Average time (s) Std. dev. (s)
Toffoli
25.9870
11.0733
Fredkin
25.0031
9.4869
Peres
25.4931
11.1753
Quantum OR
24.1854
9.1417
Negated Toffoli
26.9162
11.1561
Table 1. Synthesis of a known set of 3-qubit circuits all having optimal T -count 7.
All results come from 100 independent trials using 4096 cores (512 collectors, 1024
verifiers), and 1/2 of points distinguished as per the results of Section 5.1.

5.3. Pushing the boundaries
The largest circuit synthesized to date using pQCS is the 4-qubit 1-bit full adder, shown
in Figure 8. A synthesized version of this adder appeared in [12] with T -count 8, where
it was accomplished using peephole optimization techniques. It was suspected that it
has T -count 7 [22], which we confirm.

Parallelizing quantum circuit synthesis

13

Figure 8. The 4-qubit adder. We find directly that it has T -count 7 and T -depth 3,
and that these results are optimal.

The first successful synthesis of the adder took 12.5 hours using 4096 cores (512
collectors, 1024 verifiers) and 1/2 points distinguished. We note that a circuit as large as
the adder would likely benefit from a larger number of processors, and so more testing is
in progress. A full version of the circuit is shown in Figure 9. The initial output of pQCS
is a sequence of Paulis and a unitary corresponding to a Clifford gate as per (10). The
Pauli portion of the circuit (R(P7 ) · · · R(P1 )) was generated using the algorithm given
in the appendix of [13], and the Clifford component was generated using the algorithm
in [23]. The resultant sequence of gates was then optimized for T -depth using T -par
[24]. Interestingly, this new synthesis of the adder led to the observation that it requires
identical resources as the Toffoli gate, i.e. T -count 7, T -depth 3, and to the question of
whether this is a coincidence. In fact, it was subsequently pointed out to us that this
adder is affine equivalent to the Toffoli (i.e. unitarily equivalent up to application of
CNOTs) [25].

Figure 9. A decomposition of the 4-qubit adder over Clifford+T , optimized for T depth. The X gates indicate swaps.

6. Concluding remarks
We have presented a framework for quantum circuit synthesis based on deterministic
walks, as well as an algorithm and software for parallel quantum circuit synthesis.
We have observed a clear advantage over existing techniques using a relatively modest
number of processors, and were able to directly synthesize a 4-qubit circuit which would
have been intractable using previous methods.
Ongoing and future work on pQCS includes improvements to the application
structure and parallelization routines, extensions for synthesis in general over a specified
gate set, and the implementation of approximate circuit synthesis. Furthermore, we seek
to push the application to its limits in order to fully characterize the scaling, in particular

Parallelizing quantum circuit synthesis

14

with respect to the available memory once the circuit search spaces become sufficiently
large.
Acknowledgments
We thank SHARCNET and Scinet for use of their computing resources. Computations
were performed on the SOSCIP Consortium’s Blue Gene/Q computing platform. We are
grateful to Barbara Collignon from IBM for support with BG/Q development. We also
thank Matt Amy, Vadym Kliuchnikov, and Tom Draper for helpful discussions. Funding
was provided by NSERC, CIFAR, and SOSCIP. IQC and the Perimeter Institute are
supported in part by the Government of Canada and the Province of Ontario. SOSCIP is
funded by the Federal Economic Development Agency of Southern Ontario, the Province
of Ontario, IBM Canada Ltd., Ontario Centres of Excellence, Mitacs and 15 Ontario
academic member institutions. A portion of this work was completed while attending
the Quantum Computer Science workshop at the Banff International Research Station
(17-22 April 2016).
References
[1] Christopher M. Dawson and Michael A. Nielsen 2006 The Solovay-Kitaev algorithm. Quantum
Info. Comput. 6 (1) 81–95
[2] Vadym Kliuchnikov, Dmitri Maslov, and Michele Mosca 2013 Asymptotically optimal
approximation of single qubit unitaries by Clifford and T circuits using a constant number
of ancillary qubits. Phys. Rev. Lett. 110 190502
[3] Peter Selinger 2015 Efficient Clifford+T approximation of single-qubit operators.Quantum Info.
Comput. 15 (1-2) 159–180
[4] Vadym Kliuchnikov, Dmitri Maslov, and Michele Mosca 2016 Practical approximation of singlequbit unitaries by single-qubit quantum Clifford and T circuits. IEEE Transactions on
Computers 65 (1) 161–172
[5] Alex Bocharov, Yuri Gurevich, and Krysta M. Svore 2013 Efficient decomposition of single-qubit
gates into V basis circuits. Phys. Rev. A 88 012313
[6] Neil J. Ross 2015 Optimal ancilla-free Clifford+V approximation of Z-rotations. Quantum Info.
Comput. 15 932–950
[7] Alex Bocharov, Martin Roetteler, and Krysta M. Svore 2015 Efficient synthesis of universal repeatuntil-success circuits. Phys. Rev. Lett. 114 080502
[8] Nathan Wiebe and Martin Roetteler 2016 Quantum arithmetic and numerical analysis using
repeat-until-success circuits. Quantum Info. Comput. 16 134–178
[9] Jonathan Welch, Alex Bocharov, and Krysta M. Svore 2016 Efficient approximation of diagonal
unitaries over the Clifford+T basis. Quantum Info. Comput. 16 (1-2) 87–104
[10] Vadym Kliuchnikov, Dmitri Maslov, and Michele Mosca 2013 Fast and efficient exact synthesis
of single-qubit unitaries generated by Clifford and T gates. Quantum Info. Comput. 13 (7-8)
607–630
[11] Brett Giles and Peter Selinger 2013 Exact synthesis of multiqubit Clifford+T circuits Phys. Rev.
A 87 032332
[12] Matthew Amy, Dmitri Maslov, Michele Mosca, and Martin Roetteler 2013 A meet-in-the-middle
algorithm for fast synthesis of depth-optimal quantum circuits. IEEE Transactions on ComputerAided Design of Integrated Circuits and Systems 32 (6) 818–830

Parallelizing quantum circuit synthesis

15

[13] David Gosset, Vadym Kliuchnikov, Michele Mosca, and Vincent Russo 2014 An algorithm for the
T -count. Quantum Info. Comput. 14 (15-16) 1261–1276
[14] Vadym Kliuchnikov and Jon Yard 2015 A framework for exact synthesis.
http://arxiv.org/abs/1504.04350
[15] Simon Forest, David Gosset, Vadym Kliuchnikov, and David McKinnon 2015 Exact synthesis of
single-qubit unitaries over Clifford-cyclotomic gate sets. J. Math. Phys. 56 (8) 082201
[16] Philippe Oechslin. Making a faster cryptanalytic time-memory trade-off. Advances in Cryptology –
CRYPTO 2003, 23rd Annual International Cryptology Conference, Santa Barbara, California,
USA, August 17–21, 2003, Proceedings, vol 2729 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pp
617–630. Springer, 2003.
[17] Paul C. van Oorschot and Michael J. Wiener 1999 Parallel collision search with cryptanalytic
applications. J. Cryptol. 12 (1) 1–28
[18] Paul C. van Oorschot and Michael J. Wiener 1996 Improving Implementable Meet-in-the-Middle
Attacks by Orders of Magnitude. Advances in Cryptology – CRYPTO ’96, 16th Annual
International Cryptology Conference, Santa Barbara, California, USA August 18–22, 1996
Proceedings, vol 1109 pp 229-36. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 1996.
[19] Olivia Di Matteo 2015 Parallelizing quantum circuit synthesis. Master’s thesis, University of
Waterloo, Waterloo ON.
[20] Austin G. Fowler, Matteo Mariantoni, John M. Martinis, and Andrew N. Cleland 2012 Surface
codes: Towards practical large-scale quantum computation. Phys. Rev. A 86 032324
[21] Boost C++ Libraries. http://www.boost.org/.
[22] Matthew Amy.
Personal communication, 2016.
Established using techniques in
http://arxiv.org/abs/1601.07363.
[23] Scott Aaronson and Daniel Gottesman 2014 Improved simulation of stabilizer circuits. Phys. Rev.
A 70 052328
[24] Matthew Amy, Dmitri Maslov, and Michele Mosca 2014 Polynomial-time T -depth optimization of
Clifford+T circuits via matroid partitioning. IEEE Transactions on Computer-Aided Design of
Integrated Circuits and Systems 33 (10) 1476–1489
[25] Thomas G. Draper. Personal communication, 2016.

Appendix
The runtimes presented in (8) and (9) stem from a so-called ‘flawed’ runtime analysis
originally presented in [17]. Suppose we are searching for a collision in a space of size
N , and that the available memory is full with w distinguished points. The number of
steps required to find a single collision in this case is
Nθ 2
+ ,
w
θ

(A.1)

where θ is the fraction of points which are distinguished. The first term comes from the
fact that to fill the memory with w distinguished points, w/θ elements in the space will
be traversed on average, and any given point in a new trail has a 1/N probability of
landing on a previously seen point; the second term comes from the need to trace back
through both trails to locate the collision, and each trail has length 1/θ on average.
The assumption is made that there is a single ‘golden’ collision. In this case N/2
‘bad’ collisions will be found on average before the golden one is found. If we parallelize
using m processors and assume each step in a trail takes time τ , then we obtain a

Parallelizing quantum circuit synthesis

16

runtime
1
T ∝
m



N 2θ N
+
2w
θ


τ

(A.2)

The next step taken in [17] is to differentiate and find θ such that (A.1) is optimized,
which is what results in the inverse-square-root dependence on w. They then performed
computational experiments for a range of w and N in order to find optimal prefactors.
However, the optimal θ is expressed in terms of w/N , which when w >> N
(as is the case when we synthesize the Toffoli on the BG/Q) would not result in a
fractional θ. So let us continue a hypothetical analysis of this form without finding
the optimal θ. Consider the case where we are optimizing for T -count. In the most
general case, the two halves of the MITM equation will be different sizes N1 and N2
t
t
where N1 = 4nd 2 e and N2 = 4nb 2 c (t being the T -count). Since when we have an odd
depth we partition the larger space and search sequentially (in theory this could also
be done in parallel), we must add a prefactor of N1 /N2 in front of the runtime, and the
N becomes 2N2 , because the full space we’re searching is that of N2 × {1, 2}. As for
τ , let’s assume τ = d 2t e4αn where α is a constant which reflects the complexity of the
matrix multiplication algorithm. Then we have that
t

t

t
t
1
42nb 2 c+1 θ 2 · 4nb 2 c
T ∝ 4n(d 2 e−b 2 c)
+
m
2w
θ
!
 
t
t 1 n(α+1+d 2t e) 4nb 2 c θ 1
4
+
=
2 2m
w
θ

! 
t αn
4
2

When w >> N2 , the first term disappears and the expression reduces to
  n(α+1+d t e)
2
t 4
,
T ∝
2
mθ

(A.3)
(A.4)

(A.5)

which is exponential in both n and t, and inversely proportional to both m and θ,
precisely what we have observed in practice.

