RESEARCH ARTICLE                               A Comparative Study of Physics‐Informed and Data‐Driven
10.1029/2025JH000758
                                               Neural Networks for Compound Flood Simulation at River‐
Key Points:                                    Ocean Interfaces: A Case Study of Hurricane Irene
• A finite‐difference‐based physics‐
  informed neural network (FD‐PINN) is         Dongyu Feng1       , Zeli Tan1    , Zihan Lin2, Donghui Xu1         , Cheng‐Wei Yu3, and QiZhi He2
  developed, accelerating vanilla PINN
  by 6.5 times                                 1
                                                 Atmospheric, Climate, & Earth Sciences Division, Pacific Northwest National Laboratory, Richland, WA, USA,
• A comprehensive comparison of                2
                                                 Department of Civil, Environmental, and Geo‐ Engineering, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA,
  PINNs and data‐driven models is con-         3
  ducted for compound flood simulation           Department of Bioenvironmental Systems Engineering, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan
• Hybrid ML models show potential to
  enhance coarse‐resolution ESMs at
  river‐ocean interfaces                       Abstract       Simulating compound flooding (CF) at the river‐ocean interface within large‐scale Earth System
                                               Models (ESMs) presents significant challenges due to complex interactions between river discharge, storm
Supporting Information:
                                               surge, and tides. This study assesses the comparative advantages of physics‐informed and data‐driven machine
Supporting Information may be found in         learning (ML) approaches for enhancing local ESM performance. We systematically compare data‐driven
the online version of this article.            neural network models (i.e., CNNs, U‐Net, Long Short‐Term Memory (LSTM), Gated Recurrent Unit), and
                                               physics‐informed neural network (PINN) models, including vanilla PINN and a finite‐difference‐based PINN
Correspondence to:                             (FD‐PINN). Specifically, FD‐PINN is introduced to enhance computational efficiency, accelerating vanilla
D. Feng,                                       PINNs by ∼6.5 times while improving accuracy. To enhance data‐driven model training, a new data‐generation
dongyu.feng@pnnl.gov
                                               approach is developed to sample historical fluvial and coastal flood events, which ensures a robust data set for
                                               extreme event prediction. The models are evaluated using a realistic one‐dimensional river domain extracted
Citation:                                      from an ESM's river mesh and the Hurricane Irene event as an independent test case. Results show that FD‐
Feng, D., Tan, Z., Lin, Z., Xu, D., Yu,        PINN achieves accurate predictions with significantly reduced computational costs relative to vanilla PINNs.
C.‐W., & He, Q. (2025). A comparative
study of physics‐informed and data‐driven      Among data‐driven models, the best overall performance is achieved by a CNN‐LSTM hybrid, which balances
neural networks for compound flood             accuracy and efficiency. While a fully connected CNN (CNN‐FC) provides the best accuracy, it incurs high
simulation at river‐ocean interfaces: A case   computational cost. Architectures lacking strong temporal modeling tend to underperform on unseen events.
study of Hurricane Irene. Journal of
Geophysical Research: Machine Learning         These findings highlight the importance of sequence‐aware designs for robust generalization. This study reveals
and Computation, 2, e2025JH000758.             the trade‐offs between physics‐informed and data‐driven models and proposes an adaptive hybrid framework
https://doi.org/10.1029/2025JH000758           for integrating ML into ESMs to enhance local flood simulations.
Received 30 APR 2025
Accepted 19 SEP 2025
                                               Plain Language Summary                  Compound flooding often happens in coastal regions when heavy rain,
                                               tides, and storm surges occur together. Predicting these complex events is very difficult, especially for large
                                               climate models that simulate the Earth's systems. In this study, we explore how machine learning (ML) can help
                                               improve flood simulations in these critical coastal areas. We tested two different types of ML approaches: (a)
                                               physics‐informed models, which follow the rules of physics, and (b) data‐driven models, which learn from past
                                               flood data. We introduced a new version of a physics‐informed model, called FD‐PINN, and a new way to create
                                               better training data for data‐driven models. Using a real‐world river section and the case of Hurricane Irene, we
                                               found that the improved physics‐informed model can simulate compound flooding accurately while using much
                                               less computing time. Among data‐driven models, a hybrid design combining two types of ML (CNN and
                                               LSTM) worked best at balancing accuracy and efficiency. Our study shows that combining physics and data‐
                                               driven methods can offer powerful new tools to improve flood simulations in climate models, helping
                                               communities better prepare for future extreme weather.



                                               1. Introduction
© 2025 Battelle Memorial Institute and         Compound flooding (CF) arises from nonlinear interactions of multiple flood drivers of extreme river discharge,
The Author(s).                                 storm surge, and tide, particularly at river‐ocean interfaces (Feng, Tan, Xu, & Leung, 2023; Santiago‐Collazo
This is an open access article under the
terms of the Creative Commons                  et al., 2019; Wahl et al., 2015; Zscheischler et al., 2020). These interactions amplify flood risks in low‐lying
Attribution‐NonCommercial License,             coastal regions (Bevacqua et al., 2019), where coastal backwater effects from tide and storm surge can impede
which permits use, distribution and            river discharge or even reverse flow direction (Feng, Tan et al., 2022; Olbert et al., 2023). CF is projected to
reproduction in any medium, provided the
original work is properly cited and is not     intensify under climate change (Sarhadi et al., 2024), with recent studies documenting increased frequency and
used for commercial purposes.                  intensity of such events globally (Eilander et al., 2020). These changes are particularly evident in hurricane‐prone


FENG ET AL.                                                                                                                                                   1 of 27
                                                                                                                                          29935210, 2025, 4, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2025JH000758 by Battelle - Pacific Northwest Division, Wiley Online Library on [06/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
              JGR: Machine Learning and Computation                                                     10.1029/2025JH000758




                Figure 1. (a) Schematic of the Earth system model framework and its key components. The double‐headed arrow represents
                the two‐way information exchange in the river‐ocean coupling process. (b) A conceptual representation of ML integration
                into the ESM river‐ocean coupling, enabling enhanced compound flood (CF) simulation via targeted model refinement.

                regions, where the combination of intense precipitation and storm surge can lead to catastrophic flooding. The
                multi‐scale nature of CF processes, ranging from local hydrodynamics to regional meteorological forcing (Xu
                et al., 2025), presents a critical modeling challenge.

                Earth System Models (ESMs) are comprehensive tools designed to simulate the interconnected processes of the
                Earth's atmosphere, land, rivers, and oceans (Golaz et al., 2019, 2022) (Figure 1a). While ESMs have advanced in
                coupling riverine and coastal processes (Feng et al., 2024; Xu et al., 2022, 2024), they face critical challenges in
                accurately representing CF dynamics at the river‐ocean interface (Ward et al., 2020). In particular, the current
                ESM framework employs one‐dimensional (1D) large‐scale river models and two‐dimensional (2D) or three‐
                dimensional (3D) ocean models (Figure 1b), each optimized for their respective domains. Specifically, the 1D
                large‐scale river models, which are computationally efficient and suitable for channelized flow where pressure
                gradients dominate, employ reduced physics governing equations, such as kinematic wave or diffusion wave
                approximations of full dynamic Saint Venant equations (SVE) (Feng, Tan et al., 2022; Ikeuchi et al., 2017). These
                simplifications cannot accurately represent inertial momentum in low‐lying regions (Hodges, 2013). Addition-
                ally, despite variable‐resolution capabilities, these models cannot achieve the spatial resolution required to
                resolve fine‐scale processes within river channels due to inherent large‐scale modeling assumptions (Li
                et al., 2013). Conversely, ocean models, though capable of resolving detailed coastal dynamics with high‐
                resolution meshes in estuaries, face their own challenges. Extending the computational domain of an ocean
                model upstream into river networks substantially increases computational demands through additional grid cells
                and smaller time steps (Lilly et al., 2023). Moreover, applying 2D/3D models to predominantly 1D channelized
                flow represents an inefficient use of computational resources (Hoch et al., 2017), and may introduce unnecessary
                complexity in regions where flow is primarily governed by along‐channel momentum.
                Over the past decade, machine learning (ML) has emerged as a promising solution for addressing the compu-
                tational and physical modeling challenges in flood prediction (Kratzert et al., 2018; Nearing et al., 2024; Tran
                et al., 2023). In the context of ESMs, ML provides a pathway to incorporate subgrid‐scale processes into large‐
                scale simulations, enabling efficient representations of flood dynamics across multiple spatial and temporal scales
                (Reichstein et al., 2019; Willard et al., 2022). ML models can serve as computationally efficient alternatives that
                capture fine‐scale flood dynamics while maintaining numerical stability and physical consistency (Sit
                et al., 2020). By integrating into existing ESM frameworks (Camps‐Valls et al., 2021), ML models can serve as
                flexible intermediate‐scale models that improve the representation of river‐ocean coupling, which is critical for
                simulating extreme events.
                ML applications have demonstrated success across various flooding scenarios, including river flooding (Jiang
                et al., 2022; Nevo et al., 2022), coastal flooding (Dey et al., 2024; Hasan et al., 2023), urban flooding (Hou


FENG ET AL.                                                                                                                     2 of 27
                                                                                                                                        29935210, 2025, 4, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2025JH000758 by Battelle - Pacific Northwest Division, Wiley Online Library on [06/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
              JGR: Machine Learning and Computation                                                  10.1029/2025JH000758


                et al., 2021; Lei et al., 2021), compound flooding (Di Bacco et al., 2024; Muñoz et al., 2021), and flash flooding
                (Khosravi et al., 2018; Ma et al., 2021). Broadly, ML approaches can be categorized into two paradigms: data‐
                driven models that infer system behavior purely from observational or simulation data and physics‐informed
                models that embed physical laws within learning algorithms. Each approach faces distinct trade‐offs in terms
                of accuracy, generalizability, and computational demands.
                Data‐driven approaches have shown remarkable success in capturing complex spatial and temporal patterns in
                flood dynamics (Sit et al., 2020). They offer substantial improvements in predictive accuracy while reducing
                computational costs compared with traditional numerical methods. The evolution of data‐driven models has
                progressed from simple statistical methods to sophisticated deep learning architectures, with each advancement
                offering new capabilities for handling the complexities of flood dynamics. Traditional ML methods, including
                Linear Regression (Tsakiri et al., 2018), Radial Basis Function (Panigrahi et al., 2019), Support Vector
                Regression (Panahi et al., 2021), Decision Trees (Pham et al., 2021), and Random Forests (Chen et al., 2020),
                have established foundational frameworks for flood prediction. Recent advances in computing power and al-
                gorithm design have enabled more sophisticated approaches, such as Gaussian Process Regression (Betancourt
                et al., 2020) and gradient boosting methods such as XGBoost (Lee et al., 2024), which offer improved predictive
                capabilities while maintaining interpretability. Moreover, Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) have proven
                particularly effective in spatial feature extraction and flood extent mapping (Wang et al., 2020) while Recurrent
                Neural Networks (RNNs) excel at capturing temporal dependencies in flow dynamics (Graves & Graves, 2012;
                Nearing et al., 2024; Xiang et al., 2020). These architectures have been successfully applied to various flood‐
                related tasks, including water level or discharge predictions (Pan et al., 2020; Solanki et al., 2025), flood fore-
                casting (Le et al., 2019), 1D/2D flow simulations (Crompton et al., 2019; Maxwell et al., 2021; Pang, 2024; Zhang
                et al., 2024), and flood inundation modeling (Kabir et al., 2020). Recent studies have demonstrated the capability
                of data‐driven models to simulate compound flooding in river systems by incorporating both upstream discharge
                and downstream water level data (Moradian et al., 2024). Data‐driven models rely solely on historical data for
                training, potentially capturing complex phenomena that may be difficult to describe through physical equations
                alone (Yin et al., 2021). However, these approaches face challenges in extrapolating beyond their training data
                (Frame et al., 2022), particularly for extreme events such as peak streamflow conditions (Kim et al., 2021). This
                limitation necessitates careful consideration of training data selection and generation strategies (Fraehr
                et al., 2025).
                Physics‐Informed Neural Networks (PINNs) represent a novel method in physics‐informed ML, combining the
                universal approximation capabilities of neural networks with physical constraints derived from governing
                equations (Raissi et al., 2019). In the context of flood modeling, PINNs offer a unique advantage by enforcing
                conservation laws and physical boundary and initial conditions directly within the neural network architecture,
                ensuring conservation of mass and momentum (Karniadakis et al., 2021). Several variants of PINNs have
                emerged to address specific computational challenges: numerical method based PINNs leverage structured grid
                discretization to improve gradient computation accuracy and training stability (Jiang et al., 2023; Lim et al., 2022;
                Xiang et al., 2022). Self‐adaptive PINNs incorporating attention mechanisms have also been developed to better
                handle multi‐scale physics and complex boundary conditions (Xiang et al., 2021). Recent applications of PINNs
                in water modeling have demonstrated promising results across various scenarios. These include groundwater flow
                (Cuomo et al., 2023) and surface water dynamics using 1D kinematic wave equations (Niu et al., 2023), diffusive
                wave equations (Hou et al., 2024), dynamic wave equations (Dazzi, 2024; Feng, Tan, & He, 2023; Luo
                et al., 2024), and 2D shallow water equations (Qi et al., 2024; Tian et al., 2025; Zhou et al., 2025). The ability of
                PINNs to handle complex boundary conditions and maintain physical consistency makes them particularly
                suitable for modeling CF at river‐ocean interfaces. The key advantage of PINNs lies in their ability to incorporate
                physical knowledge directly into the learning process, potentially reducing the required training data while
                ensuring physically consistent solutions (Cai et al., 2021). In addition to learning the underlying hydrodynamics,
                PINN has the unique capability of assimilating observational data (He et al., 2020; He & Tartakovsky, 2021).
                However, challenges remain in terms of training stability, computational efficiency, and scalability to complex
                geometries (Cuomo et al., 2022).

                Despite their different approaches, both PINNs and data‐driven models offer complementary strengths for flood
                modeling. PINNs provide physically consistent solutions and require less training data but may be computa-
                tionally intensive during training (Karniadakis et al., 2021). Data‐driven models offer faster training and inference
                times and can capture complex patterns from data but require extensive training data sets (Willard et al., 2022).


FENG ET AL.                                                                                                                  3 of 27
                                                                                                                                       29935210, 2025, 4, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2025JH000758 by Battelle - Pacific Northwest Division, Wiley Online Library on [06/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
              JGR: Machine Learning and Computation                                                  10.1029/2025JH000758


                They lack the ability to intrinsically incorporate physical laws, which may lead to non‐physical predictions under
                extrapolative conditions (Brunton & Kutz, 2022). A comparison of these approaches in the context of CF
                modeling remains largely unexplored, particularly regarding their integration potential with ESMs (Jafarzadegan
                et al., 2023).

                This study presents a systematic comparison of physics‐informed and data‐driven neural networks for CF
                modeling, with a particular focus on hurricane‐induced CF during Hurricane Irene (2011). We use a small river
                reach (Lower Delaware River) extracted from a global ESM framework as a testbed to assess model performance
                and computational efficiency. To improve the efficiency of PINN, we devised an innovative architecture that uses
                the finite difference scheme to replace the computational expensive automatic differentiation (AD) in vanilla
                PINNs. We also developed a new training data generation approach that effectively captures extreme fluvial and
                coastal floods. This approach ensures that the data set is well‐suited for training data‐driven models. By evalu-
                ating different ML architectures, including vanilla PINN, finite‐difference‐based (FD) PINN, and various data‐
                driven models, we aim to identify optimal approaches for simulating CF at the river‐ocean interface of ESMs.


                2. Methods
                This study evaluates the performance of physics‐informed and data‐driven machine learning models to enhance
                the representation of hydrodynamic processes in the 1D channel at the interface between river and ocean com-
                ponents in ESMs (Figure 1a). This 1D channel is extracted from the coarser‐resolution river model mesh used in
                ESMs and refined to a higher resolution suitable for machine learning applications. At this interface, the river and
                ocean models provide the upstream and downstream boundary conditions, respectively (Figure 2a). For this
                refined 1D domain, we implement two distinct ML modeling strategies:

                1. Physics‐Informed Neural Network (PINN): The PINN‐based models are set up to take boundary condition
                   (BC) information from ESMs, along with available observational or synthetic data, to provide a high‐
                   resolution hydrodynamic solution.
                2. Data‐Driven Neural Networks: data‐driven models require a high‐resolution numerical model to generate
                   training data. A hydrodynamic model is set up to simulate historical flood events, producing a data set of
                   spatiotemporal water depth variations under different boundary conditions. This data set is then used to train
                   various data‐driven models (CNN, U‐Net, Long Short‐Term Memory (LSTM), and Gated Recurrent Unit
                   (GRU)), which learn statistical relationships between input boundary conditions and flood dynamics.
                By testing these models, we aim to assess their advantages and limitations in resolving the compounding hy-
                drodynamic processes. The objective is to determine the most effective approach for integrating ML into ESMs to
                improve CF simulations at finer scales.


                2.1. Physics‐Informed Neural Networks (PINN)
                Here, we first introduce the vanilla PINN model (hereafter, standard PINN) (Feng, Tan, & He, 2023; Raissi
                et al., 2019) to solve the one‐dimensional (1D) Saint‐Venant equations (SVE), which describe unsteady, gradually
                varied open‐channel flow. PINN is a mesh‐free deep learning framework that embeds the SVE as soft constraints
                in the loss function, ensuring that the learned solutions satisfy physical laws. Unlike purely data‐driven models,
                PINNs do not require pre‐generated training data sets from numerical simulations. We apply several enhance-
                ments, including adaptive weighting (Wang et al., 2021), Fourier feature embedding (Wong et al., 2022), and L2
                regularization (Wang et al., 2023), to improve the accuracy and stability of the PINN framework (Feng, Tan, &
                He, 2023).
                The 1D SVE consists of the continuity and momentum equations

                                                                  ∂h ∂uh
                                                                     +    = qs ,                                                (1)
                                                                  ∂t   ∂x

                                                        ∂u    ∂u  ∂h
                                                           + u + g + g Sf           S) = 0,                                     (2)
                                                        ∂t    ∂x  ∂x




FENG ET AL.                                                                                                                 4 of 27
                                                                                                                                                       29935210, 2025, 4, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2025JH000758 by Battelle - Pacific Northwest Division, Wiley Online Library on [06/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
              JGR: Machine Learning and Computation                                                             10.1029/2025JH000758




                Figure 2. (a) The schematic of the PINN‐based methods for solving the CF dynamics of the 1D channel at the river‐ocean
                interface. The data from the downstream ocean and upstream river models are provided as BCs at the channel's downstream
                (x = x0 ) and upstream (x = xn ) boundaries, respectively, where n is the number of grid cells. The remote sensing data are
                imposed at a larger time interval than the simulation time step at t = t0 and t = tm , where m is the number of time steps. In situ
                time series data at the available sites within the channel domain are also assimilated. (b) The schematic of the standard PINN and
                FD‐PINN framework, where the densely connected neural network (NN) takes the input features of the space variable x and the
                time variable t and output the velocity u and water depth h. In this study, adaptive weighting is used to balance the loss terms,
                and t is transformed by Fourier feature embedding before feeding into the neural network. The vanilla PINN and FD‐PINN use
                automatic differentiation and finite difference method (FD), respectively, to calculate the derivatives with respect to x and t.
                (c) The framework of the data‐driven NN models. The training data are generated from numerical simulations using the method
                described in Section 2.3. The input features of the NN are the time series data at the ocean and river BCs and the output feature is
                the spatiotemporal distributed water depth. Once trained, the data‐driven models predict water depth for an unseen flood event
                based on new boundary condition inputs.

                where t is time, x is the distance along the channel, h is water depth, u is flow velocity, g is gravity qs is source
                inflow and is assumed as 0 in this study. S and S f are the bottom slope and the friction slope, respectively, with the
                latter obtained using the Chezy‐Manning equation:

                                                                                 n2 |u|u
                                                                          Sf =      4      ,                                                    (3)
                                                                                   R3




FENG ET AL.                                                                                                                                5 of 27
                                                                                                                                               29935210, 2025, 4, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2025JH000758 by Battelle - Pacific Northwest Division, Wiley Online Library on [06/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
              JGR: Machine Learning and Computation                                                       10.1029/2025JH000758


                where n is Manning's roughness coefficient and the hydraulic radius R takes the form: R = bh/ (2h + b) , where
                b is the channel width.

                PINN approximates the solution to these equations using a deep neural network (DNN). The input layer consists
                of spatial (x) and temporal (t) coordinates while the output layer predicts the unknown state variables h(x, t, θ) and
                u(x, t, θ), where θ is the vector of weights and biases. The governing equations are enforced as soft constraints
                using AD (Abadi et al., 2016), ensuring that the learned solution satisfies the underlying physics. The neural
                network architecture for PINN consists of a fully connected feed‐forward DNN with L hidden layers, each
                containing NL neurons.
                In this study, the designed PINN network uses the tanh activation function, which has been found to improve
                gradient propagation in physics‐based learning problems. The network parameters (weights and biases) are
                optimized using the Adam optimizer with an exponentially decaying learning rate. The total loss function in our
                PINN framework is formulated as

                                                         L(θ) = LPDE (θ) + ∑ wj Lj (θ) + Lreg ,                                         (4)
                                                                                j



                where LPDE denotes the loss term of the governing PDE's residuals, Lj represent loss contributions from boundary
                conditions and various data sources, including upstream and downstream boundaries (i.e., at x0 and xn ), remote
                sensing snapshots at the revisit time of satellites (i.e., t0 and tm ), and in situ time‐series data at the available gauges
                (Figure 2b). Lreg denotes the regularization term. Both gauged time series measurements and spatial snapshots
                from remote sensing can be incorporated into the PINN training via these additional loss terms. While PINNs can,
                in principle, be trained using only initial and boundary conditions, the high‐resolution initial conditions are not
                available in the targeted domain of ESMs. Thus, the remote sensing data are used to constrain the spatial evolution
                of the solution.
                The weights wj are used to balance the contributions of each corresponding Lj . A critical challenge in training
                PINNs is to balance different loss terms as the scales of residuals from PDEs, boundary conditions, and data
                constraints can vary significantly. Fixed weighting schemes often lead to imbalanced issues, where one term
                dominates the loss function, causing poor convergence. To address this, we implement an adaptive weighting
                strategy based on the gradient balancing method (Wang et al., 2021). The weighting coefficients wj are updated
                dynamically at each training step to balance the gradients of different loss terms. The value of wj at the k‐th step of
                gradient descent during the training is provided as

                                                                               maxθ |∇θ LPDE (θk )|
                                                       wj = (1     α) wj + α                        ,                                   (5)
                                                                                  |∇θ Lj (θk )|

                where the overbar denotes the mean with respective to θ. The hyperparameter α is 0.9 following (Jin et al., 2021).
                This ensures that all components of the loss function contribute meaningfully to the optimization process, pre-
                venting any single term from dominating the training. The last term in Equation 4 (Lreg ) is the L2 regularization
                term (Girosi et al., 1995):

                                                                     Lreg = λ∑ w2j ,                                                    (6)
                                                                                    j



                where λ is a regularization coefficient. This term is used to penalize large weights in a neural network and prevent
                discontinuity or overfitting (Wang et al., 2023).

                Standard neural networks struggle to approximate high‐frequency variations in time‐dependent solutions,
                particularly for problems involving oscillatory dynamics such as tidal effects in river systems. To address this
                issue, Fourier feature embedding developed by Feng, Tan, and He (2023) is applied, which transforms the raw
                inputs into a higher‐dimensional space before feeding them into the network (Figure 2b). Instead of directly using
                x and t, we map them into a Fourier‐transformed feature space




FENG ET AL.                                                                                                                        6 of 27
                                                                                                                                          29935210, 2025, 4, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2025JH000758 by Battelle - Pacific Northwest Division, Wiley Online Library on [06/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
              JGR: Machine Learning and Computation                                                    10.1029/2025JH000758


                                                                      ⎡            ⎤
                                                                      ⎢ cos (2πBν) ⎥
                                                               γ(ν) = ⎢
                                                                      ⎣
                                                                                   ⎥,
                                                                                   ⎦                                               (7)
                                                                        sin(2πBυ)


                where γ is the Fourier feature mapping function, ν = [x, t]T is the input coordinates, and B is the mapping matrix
                that defines the frequency components. In this study, we apply Fourier feature embedding only to the temporal
                coordinate t. This ensures that the periodic nature of tidal wave propagation is encoded into the PINN framework.
                This technique significantly improved the accuracy of solutions near the river‐ocean interface, where periodic
                forcing plays a dominant role.

                2.2. Finite‐Difference‐Based (FD) PINN
                Despite their theoretical advantages, standard PINNs often suffer from a lack of training efficiency due to the
                intensive use of AD for calculating derivatives. This computational bottleneck limits their scalability, particularly
                in high‐resolution simulations of hydrodynamics. To address these limitations, we introduce the Finite‐
                difference‐based PINN (FD‐PINN) following Lim et al. (2022) and Jiang et al. (2023), which replaces AD
                with finite‐difference numerical approximations of spatial and temporal derivatives (Figure 2b). Here, we use a
                second‐order central difference method

                                                          ∂f f (x, t + Δt) f (x, t     Δt)
                                                             =                                ,                                    (8)
                                                          ∂t              2Δt

                                                         ∂f f (x + Δx, t) f (x       Δx, t)
                                                            =                                 ,                                    (9)
                                                         ∂x              2Δx

                where Δx and Δt are the step sizes and f denotes the flow variables u and h. Strict stability conditions are not
                required in FD‐PINN as in traditional numerical solvers, since the governing equations in PINNs are applied as
                soft constraints. Stability‐related issues can still arise. For example, the use of unnormalized flow variables with
                normalized space and time inputs can lead to unrealistically large PDE residuals and divergence during initial
                iterations.
                Unlike standard PINNs that rely on AD and thus require traversing the full computational graph to compute PDE
                residuals, FD‐PINN evaluates these residuals using explicit finite‐difference formulas. This approach reduces
                memory usage and can accelerate training by avoiding the overhead of repeated AD operations, particularly in
                high‐resolution settings. FD‐PINN also enhances numerical stability by mitigating errors associated with van-
                ishing or exploding gradients, particularly in high‐gradient regions. However, both standard PINNs and FD‐
                PINNs still rely on backpropagation for optimizing network parameters. Although the FD approach introduces
                mesh discretization, in contrast to the continuous nature of AD‐based differentiation, it retains the core structure
                and training logics and parameters as standard PINNs. While finite‐difference approaches have been previously
                introduced into PINN frameworks in other disciplines (e.g., for problems in electromagnetics or heat transport)
                (Jiang et al., 2023; Lim et al., 2022; Xiang et al., 2022), this study presents the first application of FD‐PINN to the
                SVE for hydrodynamic modeling. By combining physics‐informed learning with improved computational effi-
                ciency, FD‐PINN provides a practical and scalable solution for river‐coastal applications and integration into
                ESMs.

                2.3. Data‐Driven Neural Networks
                This study develops and evaluates a suite of data‐driven neural networks for CF dynamics in the 1D river‐ocean
                domain, including convolutional models, a hybrid CNN‐LSTM model, a U‐Net encoder–decoder architecture,
                and recurrent models (LSTM and GRU). Unlike PINNs, these models do not incorporate governing equations
                explicitly but instead rely on learning statistical relationships between boundary forcing and flood response from
                simulated hydrodynamic data.

                The neural networks are trained to map input boundary conditions to output water depth distributions along the 1D
                domain. The selection of the model architectures is based on their effectiveness in capturing different hydro-
                dynamic features relevant to CF modeling. CNN1D (referred as CNN throughout this study), a one‐dimensional


FENG ET AL.                                                                                                                    7 of 27
                                                                                                                                      29935210, 2025, 4, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2025JH000758 by Battelle - Pacific Northwest Division, Wiley Online Library on [06/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
              JGR: Machine Learning and Computation                                                 10.1029/2025JH000758


                convolutional neural network, captures spatial correlations in flood wave propagation efficiently (Atashi
                et al., 2023). We evaluated three CNN‐variants: CNN‐FC, a fully connected CNN with a large dense output layer;
                CNN‐Conv, a simplified fully convolutional model using 1D convolutions and a linear projection layer; and
                CNN‐LSTM, a hybrid architecture combining convolutional feature extraction with temporal sequence modeling
                using LSTM layers. These variants represent different design trade‐offs between complexity, efficiency, and
                temporal expressiveness. U‐Net, a fully convolutional network with an encoder‐decoder architecture and skip
                connections, is well‐suited for capturing multi‐scale flood dynamics (J. Li et al., 2024). LSTM and GRU, both
                RNN architectures, are selected due to their wide applications in streamflow predictions, where they effectively
                capture temporal dependencies in time series data (Le et al., 2021; Nevo et al., 2022). LSTM is designed to handle
                sequential dependencies and is effective in modeling long‐term flood memory, while GRU, a variant of LSTM
                with fewer parameters, provides faster training while maintaining comparable predictive capability but may lose
                some expressiveness in capturing highly nonlinear flood dynamics. Each model is trained using a supervised
                learning approach, with the loss function minimizing the difference between predicted and simulated water depth.
                The trained models are evaluated based on prediction accuracy, computational efficiency, and generalization
                performance on an unseen extreme event.

                2.3.1. Data Set Generation
                To ensure a robust and representative training data set, we develop a structured data processing and sampling
                approach that enhances the model's ability to generalize to extreme flood events (Figure 2c).
                A key limitation of training ML models on the full streamflow and water level time series is the imbalance
                between frequent low‐to‐moderate floods and rare extreme floods, which can lead to biased predictions and poor
                generalization to extreme events (Kim et al., 2021). To address this, we developed a new method for training data
                generation (Figure 2c). This method generates synthetic training data using high‐resolution hydrodynamic
                simulations, in which long‐term observational records are used to inform the statistical characteristics of
                boundary forcing.
                We first analyze historical flood records of river discharge at the upstream boundary and ocean water level at the
                downstream boundary to identify realistic and representative flood scenarios (Feng, Tan et al., 2022). For the
                selection of fluvial flood events from the gauged discharge time series, peak values are first identified using the
                peaks‐over‐threshold (POT) method (Lang et al., 1999). The threshold is determined through an automated se-
                lection process, ensuring that only independent flood peaks are retained (Zhang et al., 2021). To further ensure
                independence, a declustering technique is applied to eliminate closely spaced peaks. The selection of the storm
                surge event is performed by (a) extracting the storm surge component from the hourly total water level data and
                (b) using a peak detection algorithm to filter the extreme events (Feng, Tan et al., 2022). This method identifies
                periods where peak river discharge and extreme coastal storm surges occur within a given time window. These
                events are then ranked based on intensity of peak discharge and storm surge level, and a return period analysis is
                performed to ensure the inclusion of only significant flood scenarios. To focus on extreme conditions, we select
                events with a return period exceeding 5 years. This ensures that the training data set is not biased toward more
                frequent moderate floods.
                Rather than using these historical events directly, we generate synthetic boundary conditions through Latin
                Hypercube Sampling (LHS) (Iman, 2008). Each sampled event represents a distinct realization of riverine and
                coastal forcing. The training data set thus captures a broad spectrum of possible CF conditions. We also introduce
                timing shifts to create additional variability while preserving physically realistic magnitudes. The synthetic
                combinations are then used as boundary forcing inputs to a high‐resolution hydrodynamic model, which simulates
                water depth evolution over the event duration. A withheld extreme event is excluded from the training data set to
                assess model generalization on an unseen event during testing. This approach can produce a physically consistent,
                diverse, and statistically grounded data set for training data‐driven models.


                3. Model Application and Evaluation
                3.1. Study Domain and Hurricane Event

                We selected the lower Delaware River reach as our study domain (Figure 3). Located along the U.S. Mid‐Atlantic
                coast, the Delaware River supplies drinking water to approximately 6% of the U.S. population. The lower reach is


FENG ET AL.                                                                                                                8 of 27
                                                                                                                                         29935210, 2025, 4, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2025JH000758 by Battelle - Pacific Northwest Division, Wiley Online Library on [06/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
              JGR: Machine Learning and Computation                                                    10.1029/2025JH000758




                Figure 3. Study domain of the Lower Delaware River reach. The figure shows the river outline, 1D TELEMAC cross‐
                sections, gauge stations, and locations of synthetic gauges used in PINN training. The inset shows the entire DRB.

                characterized by a relatively flat topography and is influenced by the upstream propagation of tidal forces—
                primarily driven by M2 and S2 semidiurnal constituents—as well as storm surges from Delaware Bay and up-
                stream discharge from the Delaware River. This region was chosen not only for its complex hydrodynamics but
                also because we have previously configured a global Earth System Model (ESM) using the Energy Exascale Earth
                System model (E3SM) with a tailored mesh design for both river and ocean models (Figure S1 in Supporting
                Information S1) (Feng et al., 2024). The river model mesh is refined to 3 km resolution within the Mid‐Atlantic
                watersheds. The ocean model features a high‐resolution 250 m mesh along the U.S. East Coast, transitioning to
                1 km resolution elsewhere. Despite these refinements, a substantial resolution mismatch remains between the
                river and ocean model components. Further refining the river mesh is not conceptually appropriate given the
                model's inherent assumption (Li et al., 2013). Using the high‐resolution ocean mesh for the entire interface region
                is also computationally inefficient. For example, a 10‐day Hurricane Irene simulation takes approximately 10 min
                on 400 CPUs for the river model, whereas the 2D barotropic ocean component requires over 5 hr. This
                configuration highlights a key limitation in current ESMs: even with refinement, coarse‐resolution river models
                struggle to capture localized fine‐scale hydrodynamic processes at the river‐ocean interface. The 1D river channel
                test domain in this study is extracted from the E3SM's river model mesh. Although E3SM is not directly used in
                the simulations here, its configuration provides the basis for higher‐resolution modeling of river‐ocean in-
                teractions. This study serves as an intermediate step toward identifying ML models suitable for future integration
                into the same E3SM configurations.
                Hurricane Irene, which made landfall on the U.S. East Coast on 27 August 2011, was selected as a representative
                CF event due to its significant hydrometeorological impacts on the Delaware River region. This event was
                characterized by extreme rainfall within Delaware River Basin and peak storm surge of >1.8 m in Delaware Bay
                (Avila & Cangialosi, 2011). The compound nature of Irene makes it an ideal case for analyzing the ML models'
                performance in simulating the interplay between riverine and coastal flooding mechanisms in a CF scenario. To
                the best of our knowledge, it is the only major hurricane‐induced CF event recorded in this specific domain.




FENG ET AL.                                                                                                                    9 of 27
                                                                                                                                        29935210, 2025, 4, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2025JH000758 by Battelle - Pacific Northwest Division, Wiley Online Library on [06/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
              JGR: Machine Learning and Computation                                                   10.1029/2025JH000758




                Figure 4. Numerical model setup. (a) Upstream discharge from USGS. (b) Downstream water level. The interval marked by
                the vertical dashed lines represents the 10‐day simulation period for Hurricane Irene.

                3.2. Numerical Model Setup and Data Collection

                In the extracted 1D river‐ocean domain, a high‐resolution hydrodynamic model was configured using the
                TELEMAC‐MASCARET modeling system (Feng et al., 2025; Hervouet, 2000) to provide both training and
                reference data for the ML models. Although the global E3SM also encompasses this region (Feng et al., 2024), its
                10‐day Hurricane Irene simulation cannot sample the full spectrum of CF scenarios needed for robust model
                training. TELEMAC is selected for its ability to solve the full dynamic SVE and its efficiency to run on high‐
                performance computing (HPC) systems. The latter is important for generating the large ensemble of simula-
                tions needed to train and evaluate data‐driven models. The model was configured with a spatial resolution of
                200 m in both the along‐channel and cross‐channel directions, where the river topology data are from Feng
                et al. (2024) (Figure 3; Figure S2 in Supporting Information S1). Although the original setup was two‐
                dimensional (2D), careful evaluation confirmed that variations in the cross‐channel direction were negligible,
                which justifies the reduction to a 1D framework while preserving the essential flood dynamics.

                To perform TELEMAC simulations over various historical events and generate the ensemble training data sets,
                the upstream and downstream boundary conditions were obtained from the closest NOAA and USGS gauge
                stations, respectively (Figures 3; Figures 4a and 4b). The model was run for 10 days, and the output was archived
                at 1‐hr intervals. The simulation was first spun up for 1 month, after which a restart file was saved. This restart
                condition was then used to run an ensemble of event‐scale simulations, generating a diverse and physically
                consistent training data set for the data‐driven models.


                3.3. Machine Learning Model Setup
                In the PINN and FD‐PINN training, the synthetic remote sensing data at the initial and last time steps, assuming a
                10‐day revisiting time, and synthetic in situ times‐series observations over the simulation period are from the
                TELEMAC simulation. The in situ observation sites are imposed at three evenly distributed locations along the
                channel (Figure 2a). While the in situ measurements are generally considered highly accurate (Turnipseed &
                Sauer, 2010), remote sensing data, even when refined to resolutions on the order of 10 m, such as SWOT data
                (Domeneghetti et al., 2018; Getirana et al., 2024), may introduce greater uncertainties. To evaluate the robustness
                of the PINN framework to observational noise, we imposed noise levels of 0.1%, 0.5%, 1%, 5%, and 10% on the
                synthetic remote sensing data. For both PINN and FD‐PINN, the collocation points where the PDE residuals are
                evaluated were uniformly distributed with a spatial resolution of 400 m and a temporal resolution of 1 hr, which
                ensures sufficient resolution for model accuracy while avoiding excessive computational overhead during
                training. The architecture of PINN and FD‐PINN consists of a fully connected feed‐forward DNN with five
                hidden layers, each containing 64 neurons. We employed the widely used initialization scheme of Xavier scheme
                (Glorot & Bengio, 2010). This configuration follows the design used in Cases 5 and 6 of Feng, Tan, and
                He (2023), which were trained with a comparable amount of data. The models are trained for 80,000 iterations,



FENG ET AL.                                                                                                                  10 of 27
                                                                                                                                                29935210, 2025, 4, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2025JH000758 by Battelle - Pacific Northwest Division, Wiley Online Library on [06/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
              JGR: Machine Learning and Computation                                                         10.1029/2025JH000758




                Figure 5. (a, c) Selection of fluvial flood and storm surge events. (b, d) Ranking of events based on their peak values, with
                Hurricane Irene, which was excluded from the training data set, highlighted in red.

                during which the reference solutions from TELEMAC are used to monitor the evolution of the L2 norm, ensuring
                model performance is tracked and potential overfitting is detected. The L2 norm is defined as
                                                                       √̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
                                                                       √ N ∗
                                                                       √ ∑i=1 hi hi )
                                                                  ϵ=                 N                 ,                                 (10)
                                                                                  ∑i=1 h2i

                where i is the collocation point index, N is the number of collocation points, hi and h∗i represent the referenced and
                predicted water depth at the ith point.
                For the data‐driven models, the training data set was constructed following the methodology outlined in Sec-
                tion 2.3. Fluvial flooding and storm surge events were first identified from the 30‐year time series of available
                data, considering that the NOAA gauge was established in 1989 (Figures 5a and 5c). To define the downstream
                boundary conditions, the measured total water level was decomposed into its tidal and storm surge components
                using harmonic tidal analysis with eight tidal constituents (M2, S2, N2, K2, K1, O1, P1, Q1, and M4). The storm
                surge component was then subjected to event‐based sampling, and the selected events were superimposed onto
                the tidal signal to reconstruct realistic boundary conditions.
                The selected flooding events were ranked based on their return periods, and only those exceeding 5 years were
                included in the training data set (Figures 5b and 5d). Hurricane Irene, which has a return period of approximately
                10 years in terms of both discharge and storm surge, was intentionally excluded from the training data set to serve
                as an unseen test event. For model evaluation, the data‐driven models were assessed on the full test data set as well
                as two subsets: one comprising events with a return period below 10 years (representing less extreme floods) and
                another with return periods exceeding 10 years (representing more extreme events). This enables a compre-
                hensive assessment of model performance across different flood magnitudes.
                For each selected event, the peak timing was shifted by 1–5 days within the 10‐day period, generating a total of 88
                fluvial flood samples (Figure S3a in Supporting Information S1), 96 storm surge (Figure S3b in Supporting
                Information S1), and downstream water level samples (Figure S3c in Supporting Information S1). The 10‐day
                duration was chosen to be consistent with the Hurricane Irene simulation used in the PINN experiments and in
                Feng et al. (2024). This duration reflects the typical timescale of CF events in the Lower Delaware River. In such
                events, storm surge often determines the duration as it typically occurs over just a few days. We found the 10‐day


FENG ET AL.                                                                                                                         11 of 27
                                                                                                                                        29935210, 2025, 4, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2025JH000758 by Battelle - Pacific Northwest Division, Wiley Online Library on [06/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
              JGR: Machine Learning and Computation                                                  10.1029/2025JH000758


                window to be sufficient for capturing the interaction between fluvial and coastal forcings. Using the LHS‐sampled
                boundary conditions, a total of 800 ensemble simulations were conducted (Figure S4 in Supporting Informa-
                tion S1). To assess the impact of training data set size on model performance, the data‐driven models were trained
                using subsets ranging from 100 to 800 simulations. The data set was then partitioned into 70% for training, 15%
                for validation, and 15% for testing.
                In this study, we applied a two‐step logarithmic transformation and Min‐Max scaling approach to preprocess the
                input and output features for the data‐driven models. Given the wide range of values and potential skewness in the
                data set, particularly between discharge and water level, natural logarithm transformation with a shift was first
                applied to the boundary conditions and target variables

                                                                   ξʹ = log(1 + ξ),                                             (11)

                where ξ represents discharge and water depth and ξʹ denotes the transformed data. This transformation helps to
                reduce the impact of extreme values and stabilize the variance of the data. Following the logarithmic trans-
                formation, we applied Min‐Max scaling to normalize the transformed variables into the range (0.01, 1):

                                                                 ξʹ ξʹmin
                                                    ξscaled =               × (1   0.01) + 0.01,                                (12)
                                                                ξʹmax ξʹmin

                where ξscaled is the scaled data and ξʹmax and ξʹmin represents the maximum and minimum values in ξʹ , respectively.
                This scaling ensures that the data remain within a controlled range while avoiding zero values, which can be
                problematic for NN activations. Separate Min‐Max Scalers were fitted for the two input features and the output
                feature to ensure that each feature was normalized independently to preserve the original distribution charac-
                teristics, particularly effective for deep learning applications in hydrodynamic modeling.
                The architectures of the data‐driven models, including the number of hidden layers, neurons per layer, and input‐
                output shapes, are provided in Figure S5 of Supporting Information S1. All models are trained using Mean
                Squared Error (MSE) as the objective function. Model configurations were optimized through trial and error
                based on the size and characteristics of the available training data set. To support generalization to unseen extreme
                events, we emphasized maintaining architectural simplicity across all models, especially for the more complex
                model U‐Net that is more prone to performance degradation in such cases. Finally, in addition to the L2 norm, we
                evaluated the performance of all ML models using MSE, Mean Absolute Error (MAE), and coefficient of
                determination (R2). For efficiency comparison, all models are trained using Tensorflow on an Intel(R) Xeon(R)
                Gold 6148 CPU @ 2.4 GHz.


                4. Results
                4.1. Standard and FD PINNs
                The predicted water depth from both standard PINN and FD‐PINN is evaluated against the TELEMAC reference
                solution for Hurricane Irene (Figure 6). Both models show relatively low error, with L2 norms of 0.037 and 0.035,
                respectively, both values being lower than those reported in Cases 5 and 6 of Feng, Tan, and He (2023) (Figure 7).
                The models effectively reproduce the periodic tidal oscillations, capturing both amplitude and frequency accu-
                rately in the low‐lying regions (x = 0–50,000 m). Additionally, they successfully simulate the upstream propa-
                gation of storm surge, which extends up to 60,000 m from the downstream boundary between 50 and 150 hr.
                However, both models struggle to fully capture the precipitation‐induced high discharge from the upstream
                boundary in the sloped region (x = 65,000–70,000 m). A larger bias is also observed in the transition zone
                (x = 55,000–60,000 m), where nonlinear tide‐surge‐discharge interactions occur. This discrepancy is expected, as
                handling discontinuities remains a well‐known challenge for PINNs, particularly in scenarios involving shock
                waves with strong nonlinear dynamics (Liu et al., 2024).
                The evolution of the L2 norm and the evaluation metrics (MSE, MAE, R2, and L2 norm) indicates consistent
                performance, robustness to noise, and minimal overfitting across all experiments, except for the case with 10%
                noise in both standard PINN and FD‐PINN (Figures 7 and 8). As expected, model accuracy generally declines as
                noise levels increase from 0% to 5%, but a significant drop in performance is observed at the 10% noise, where


FENG ET AL.                                                                                                                 12 of 27
                                                                                                                                                 29935210, 2025, 4, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2025JH000758 by Battelle - Pacific Northwest Division, Wiley Online Library on [06/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
              JGR: Machine Learning and Computation                                                           10.1029/2025JH000758




                Figure 6. (a) Reference TELEMAC‐simulated water depth during Hurricane Irene (Aug 26–5 Sep 2011). (b, c) Show the
                predicted water depth from the standard PINN and FD‐PINN, respectively. (d, e) Depict the corresponding biases of the
                standard PINN and FD‐PINN relative to the reference simulation. The green dots, red stars, and black circles in panel
                (a) represent the training data locations of BCs, remote sensing and in situ measurements, respectively. Both predictions were
                generated under noise‐free conditions (0% noise level).




                Figure 7. Evolution of the L2 norm over 80,000 training iterations, with a magnified view from 60,000 to 80,000 iterations for
                (a) standard PINN and (b) FD‐PINN.


FENG ET AL.                                                                                                                           13 of 27
                                                                                                                                       29935210, 2025, 4, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2025JH000758 by Battelle - Pacific Northwest Division, Wiley Online Library on [06/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
              JGR: Machine Learning and Computation                                                   10.1029/2025JH000758




                Figure 8. Model evaluation metrics of standard PINN and FD‐PINN, including (a) Mean Squared Error, (b) Mean Absolute
                Error, (c) Coefficient of Determination (R2), and (d) L2 norm.

                errors become substantially larger. Examining the L2 norm evolution, a notable increase is observed in the
                standard PINN after 60,000 iterations (Figures 7a and 7b), suggesting potential overfitting at higher noise levels.
                In contrast, FD‐PINN does not exhibit this overfitting trend; however, once convergence is reached, the final L2
                norm at the 10% noise remains higher than in other experiments (Figures 8a–8d). In addition to the second‐order
                central difference scheme, we also tested a first‐order backward difference implementation. Results (Figure S6 in
                Supporting Information S1) show minimal sensitivity to the scheme type, largely due to the relatively small PDE
                loss and the effectiveness of the adaptive weighting strategy.
                When comparing standard PINN and FD‐PINN, both models show similar accuracy, but FD‐PINN demonstrates
                greater stability. This is implied in the L2 norm evolution (Figures 7a and 7b), where FD‐PINN achieves more
                stable and faster convergence than standard PINN. More importantly, by replacing AD with finite‐difference
                approximations, FD‐PINN significantly enhances computational efficiency. The training time for 80,000 itera-
                tions is 15 hr for standard PINN but only 2.3 hr for FD‐PINN, making FD‐PINN approximately 6.5 times faster.
                The extremely long training time of standard PINN is primarily due to the computational cost of AD, which, while
                allowing a mesh‐free approach, significantly reduces efficiency. This computational bottleneck in the PINN
                training has been widely reported in the literature (Luo et al., 2024) and remains a long‐standing challenge.
                Although PINNs have demonstrated promising accuracy improvements in certain cases, their low efficiency
                limits their applicability for real‐world applications, especially when traditional forward numerical methods offer
                significantly faster solutions. In contrast, FD‐PINN effectively mitigates this issue. Notably, if we consider the
                convergence point at 40,000 iterations, the training time for FD‐PINN is reduced to approximately 1 hr, making it
                a feasible alternative for practical applications. For reference, the TELEMAC forward simulation takes about
                10 min to run on the same CPU node. Note that training efficiency could be further enhanced when using GPUs.
                Given that global ocean models also operate on relatively slow time scales, FD‐PINN's efficiency allows it to be
                integrated into coupled ESM frameworks without introducing excessive computational overhead.


                4.2. Data‐Driven Neural Networks

                The water depth predictions from the data‐driven models, that is, CNN‐FC, CNN‐Conv, CNN‐LSTM, U‐Net,
                LSTM, and GRU, trained on 100 to 800 simulation samples were evaluated against the TELEMAC reference
                solution. Model performance was first assessed using the full test data set, which includes events with a return
                period exceeding 5 years (Figure 9). Overall, all models demonstrated good predictive capability, with errors
                decreasing as the training sample size increased, eventually converging at around 700 samples. Among them,


FENG ET AL.                                                                                                                 14 of 27
                                                                                                                                              29935210, 2025, 4, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2025JH000758 by Battelle - Pacific Northwest Division, Wiley Online Library on [06/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
              JGR: Machine Learning and Computation                                                        10.1029/2025JH000758




                Figure 9. Evaluation metrics of (a) MSE, (b) MAE, (c) R2, and (d) L2 norm for the data‐driven models trained on 100 to 800
                simulation samples and tested on the full test data set (events with a return period >5 years).

                CNN‐FC and U‐Net exhibited the highest predictive accuracy on the test data set, followed closely by CNN‐
                LSTM, LSTM, and GRU. CNN‐Conv consistently produced higher errors, indicating its limited capability to
                model temporal dependencies.

                The models show consistent convergence and similar performance when evaluated on the two test data set subsets
                described in Section 3.3 (Figure 10). In general, they demonstrate better predictive performance for less extreme
                flood events compared with more extreme events, particularly when trained on smaller sample sizes (100–300
                simulations). This disparity arises from the lower representation of extreme events in the training data set, making
                it more challenging for the models to generalize to high‐magnitude floods. However, as the training data set size




                Figure 10. Evaluation metrics of (a) MSE, (b) MAE, (c) R2, and (d) L2 norm for the data‐driven models trained on 100 to 800
                simulation samples and tested on the two subsets: less extreme flood events with a return period of 5–10 years (represented
                by “below” in lighter dashed lines) and more extreme flood events with return periods exceeding 10 years (represented by
                “above” in darker solid lines).


FENG ET AL.                                                                                                                        15 of 27
                                                                                                                                           29935210, 2025, 4, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2025JH000758 by Battelle - Pacific Northwest Division, Wiley Online Library on [06/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
              JGR: Machine Learning and Computation                                                     10.1029/2025JH000758




                Figure 11. Evaluation metrics of (a) MSE, (b) MAE, (c) R2, and (d) L2 norm for the data‐driven models against standard
                PINN and FD‐PINN in predicting the unseen Hurricane Irene event.

                increases, this performance gap diminishes, implying the effectiveness of our proposed data generation method
                for handling two compound extremes.
                Finally, all models were applied to simulate the unseen Hurricane Irene event, which has a return period of
                approximately 10 years and was excluded from the training data set (Figure 11). A comparison of the spatio-
                temporal distribution of water depth between TELEMAC reference solution and the model predictions is pre-
                sented in Figures S7–S12 in Supporting Information S1. Among the models, CNN‐FC shows the best
                performance, which benefits from its high parameter count and fully connected structure that directly maps global
                patterns (Table S1 in Supporting Information S1). CNN‐LSTM, LSTM, and GRU also demonstrated strong
                generalizability. All four models converged at a training sample size of 500. When trained with 100 samples,
                CNN‐FC showed slightly higher errors than the PINN models, with an L2 norm of 0.04 (Figure 11d). However, as
                the training data set increased beyond 200 samples, CNN‐FC outperformed PINNs, reducing the L2 norm to as
                low as 0.025. CNN‐LSTM, LSTM, and GRU models initially underperformed compared with PINNs when
                trained on 100–400 samples but eventually demonstrated slightly improved performance, achieving an L2 norm of
                approximately 0.03 (Figure 11d). CNN‐Conv produced higher errors across all training sizes. Notably, the U‐Net
                model, which had previously performed comparably to CNN on the test data set, exhibited unexpectedly poor
                performance on the Irene event. Unlike the other models, its errors did not decrease with an increasing sample
                size, remaining 1.5 to 3 times larger than those of the other models. This suggests potential limitations in its ability
                to generalize to previously unseen extreme events.

                A comparison across model architectures reveals distinct performance patterns, which shows the architectural
                strengths and limitations of each model (Table S1 in Supporting Information S1). Convolutional networks (CNN‐
                FC, CNN‐Conv, CNN‐LSTM, and U‐Net) are particularly effective at capturing spatial patterns in flood wave
                propagation (Ouma & Omai, 2023). CNN‐FC achieves the highest predictive accuracy but at the cost of extreme
                parameter complexity. In contrast, CNN‐Conv, which features a simplified, fully convolutional structure,
                consistently underperforms due to its limited ability to model temporal dependencies. The hybrid CNN‐LSTM
                model combines the strengths of convolutional and recurrent networks. It consistently ranks among the top‐
                performing models, offering a strong balance of accuracy, generalizability, and computational efficiency.
                Meanwhile, the RNN‐based models (LSTM and GRU), while effective in learning temporal dependencies, have
                limitations in accurately representing spatial variations and the transition zone between discharge‐dominated and
                tide‐surge‐dominated flows (Fang et al., 2017; Kratzert et al., 2018; Sit et al., 2020; Xu et al., 2023). The per-
                formance difference between LSTM and GRU is relatively small, suggesting that both architectures process
                temporal dependencies in a similar manner within this context.



FENG ET AL.                                                                                                                    16 of 27
                                                                                                                                      29935210, 2025, 4, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2025JH000758 by Battelle - Pacific Northwest Division, Wiley Online Library on [06/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
              JGR: Machine Learning and Computation                                                 10.1029/2025JH000758


                While U‐Net performs competitively on the test data set, particularly when trained on smaller sample sizes (100–
                400 simulations), its performance degrades significantly on the unseen Hurricane Irene event (Figure 11). The U‐
                Net's encoder‐decoder architecture provides strong multi‐scale feature extraction capabilities, which is beneficial
                when interpolating within the training distribution. However, its increased architectural complexity may lead to
                overfitting in our simulation, especially when applied to previously unseen extreme events. Moreover, U‐Net's
                reliance on localized spatial correlations may limit its ability to learn broader hydrodynamic trends, which are
                critical for capturing the evolving nature of CF (A. Li et al., 2024).
                These findings highlight the importance of adjusting the architecture of data‐driven models according to the study
                problems. While complex architectures can be effective under certain conditions, they may not be optimal for
                generalization. For the relatively simple 1D river–ocean interface setup, models that effectively balance spatial
                and temporal learning, such as CNN‐LSTM, provide a practical and accurate solution. Simpler RNN‐based
                models such as LSTM and GRU also perform well under these conditions while simplified CNN variants
                (e.g., CNN‐Conv) may be unskillful. Ultimately, model performance is problem‐specific, depending on data
                availability, hydrodynamic complexity, and the degree of extrapolation required (Nearing et al., 2024).

                5. Discussions
                5.1. Intercomparison Between Physics‐Informed and Data‐Driven Neural Networks

                The comparison of PINN, FD‐PINN, and data‐driven ML models highlights differences in efficiency, inter-
                pretability, and computational requirements, offering distinct advantages depending on application needs
                (Table 1). PINNs leverage governing equations as soft constraints in the loss function, allowing solutions without
                requiring pre‐generated training data sets from numerical simulations of a high‐fidelity model. When remote
                sensing or observational data are available, PINNs can be trained solely on these data, making them particularly
                valuable where a high‐resolution model has not been set up. However, in the absence of satellite observations,
                high‐resolution numerical outputs may be used as synthetic observations, but these are not an inherent require-
                ment of the framework. While this approach is feasible, it reduces the practical advantage of the PINN framework
                by introducing dependency on physical models, which can limit its independence and scalability across diverse
                regions.
                PINNs are computationally expensive, with training times on the order of O(10 hr) in this case, limiting their
                scalability. FD‐PINNs improve upon standard PINNs by incorporating finite‐difference discretization, signifi-
                cantly enhancing training efficiency while maintaining physics constraints. With training times reduced to O
                (1 hr), FD‐PINNs overcome one of the main challenges of standard PINNs while retaining interpretability.
                However, they require a structured numerical mesh, which adds complexity to the setup. Data‐driven ML models
                offer the fastest inference time, requiring only O(1 min) to O (1 hr) for training and very low (O(1 min)) post‐
                training computational costs compared to ∼10 min per TELEMAC run, making them ideal as lightweight sur-
                rogates for rapid scenario exploration. While PINNs and FD‐PINNs typically use multilayer perceptrons (MLPs),
                data‐driven models vary in architecture, depending on the task and data structure. Also, data‐driven models such
                as CNN, LSTM, and GRU have demonstrated improved accuracy over PINNs in our study, showing their
                suitability for predicting flood dynamics.
                Another key distinction between these approaches lies in model deployment efficiency. Both PINNs and FD‐
                PINNs follow an online training paradigm, meaning that once trained, they can generate solutions instantly
                without requiring additional simulations. In contrast, data‐driven models depend on extensive pretraining with
                labeled data, which is typically generated from numerical simulations. Setting up these simulations requires
                model configuration, mesh generation, BC processing, and input data preprocessing, along with prior expertise in
                numerical modeling. Additionally, running numerical simulations can be highly time‐consuming. For instance,
                generating training data for this study required 800 TELEMAC simulations, each taking 10 min, totaling 133 hr.
                Training times for data‐driven models also vary significantly: LSTM and GRU complete training in just a few
                minutes while CNN‐FC requires over an hour when trained on 800 samples (Figure S13 in Supporting Infor-
                mation S1). These computational demands highlight the upfront efforts required to train purely data‐driven
                models, which are highly case‐specific and depend on factors such as region, spatial scale, model setup
                complexity, and the user's background and domain knowledge. However, once trained, data‐driven models can
                deliver near‐instantaneous predictions, making them particularly effective for repeated runs under perturbed or
                uncertain inputs.


FENG ET AL.                                                                                                               17 of 27
 FENG ET AL.
                   Table 1
                   Computational Cost and Methodological Trade‐Offs Among PINN, FD‐PINN, and Data‐Driven ML Models for Flood Dynamics
                   Feature                                                                                        PINN                                                                                    FD‐PINN                                                                          Data‐Driven ML
                   Model type                                                Physics‐Informed Neural Network (PDE solver)                                               Hybrid physics‐informed with numerical                                                     Black‐box data‐driven ML
                                                                                                                                                                           discretization (PDE solver)
                   Governing Equations                                       Enforced via soft constraints in the loss function                                         Enforced via soft constraints in the loss function                                         Not explicitly enforced, relies on data patterns
                                                                                using automatic differentiation                                                            using finite‐difference approximations
                   Numerical Model Requirement                               Not required                                                                               Not a full simulation; finite‐difference discretization                                    Required for generating training data
                                                                                                                                                                           is used to approximate PDE derivatives during
                                                                                                                                                                           training
                   Mesh Dependency                                           Mesh‐free                                                                                  Requires a numerical mesh (finite‐difference grid)                                         Requires a numerical mesh (grid‐based training
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      data)
                   Pretraining Requirement                                   No pretraining needed                                                                      No pretraining needed                                                                      Requires numerical model outputs for training
                   Data Dependency                                           Optional in PINNs, but required in this framework to                                       Optional in PINNs, but required in this framework to                                       Highly dependent on large labeled data sets
                                                                                constrain spatial solution                                                                 constrain spatial solution
                   Accuracy                                                  Moderate (resistance to noise)                                                             Higher than PINN due to direct numerical                                                   High if provided sufficient training data
                                                                                                                                                                           enforcement
                   Interpretability                                          High (White‐box ML with physics constraints)                                               High (White‐box ML with physics constraints and                                            Low (Black‐box ML)
                                                                                                                                                                           numerical discretization)
                   Computational Cost                                        Training: O (10 hr)                                                                        Training: O (1 hr)                                                                         Training: Low (O (1 min) ∼ O (1 hr))
                                                                                Post‐training: Not required                                                                Post‐training: Not required                                                                Post‐training: Very low (O (1 min))
                                                                                Numerical Simulations: Not required (synthetic                                             Numerical Simulations: Not required (Same as                                               Numerical Simulations: High (e.g., 10 min
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               JGR: Machine Learning and Computation




                                                                                simulations may be used for benchmarking or                                                PINN)                                                                                      × 800 = 133 hr)
                                                                                generating pseudo‐observations, but are not
                                                                                inherent to the framework)
                   Setup Complexity                                          Requires advanced loss function design (e.g.,                                              Requires advanced loss function design (e.g.,                                              Requires extensive numerical simulations for
                                                                                adaptive weighting, Fourier transform, L2                                                  adaptive weighting, Fourier transform, L2                                                  training
                                                                                regularization)                                                                            regularization) and numerical discretization
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 10.1029/2025JH000758




 18 of 27
29935210, 2025, 4, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2025JH000758 by Battelle - Pacific Northwest Division, Wiley Online Library on [06/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
                                                                                                                                         29935210, 2025, 4, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2025JH000758 by Battelle - Pacific Northwest Division, Wiley Online Library on [06/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
              JGR: Machine Learning and Computation                                                   10.1029/2025JH000758


                Moreover, looking toward future applications, while data‐driven models may struggle to extrapolate beyond the
                distribution of their training data, this limitation can be mitigated by retraining with enriched or hypothetical data
                sets that incorporate a wider range of extreme events. PINNs, by contrast, are inherently physics‐informed and can
                generalize beyond historical observations. However, a drawback of the current framework is that they depend on
                assimilated observations and therefore cannot be directly applied to forecasting future scenarios where such data
                are unavailable. These differences highlight complementary strengths and limitations that should be considered
                when applying these approaches to future extreme flooding events driven by climate change and land use change
                (Avand & Moradi, 2021).
                Ultimately, the choice between PINNs, FD‐PINNs, and data‐driven models depends on application needs. FD‐
                PINNs balance efficiency and interpretability, overcoming the computational burden of standard PINNs, while
                data‐driven models offer the fastest inference but require extensive pretraining. These trade‐offs should be
                carefully considered when selecting a modeling approach for CF dynamics and related hydrodynamic
                applications.


                5.2. Implication for ESM Implementation
                5.2.1. Benchmarking Against an ESM Proxy

                To provide a baseline for evaluating the performance of ML models against traditional physics‐based approaches,
                we set up two cases using HEC‐RAS (Brunner et al., 2015) within the same domain extracted from our global
                E3SM simulation (Figure 3). HEC‐RAS was selected as a proxy for the river component of an ESM because it
                offers a diffusion wave method, consistent with those used in large‐scale ESM river models, for example, E3SM
                (Feng, Tan et al., 2022). HEC‐RAS was configured using the same input parameters as the TELEMAC and ML
                model setups, including channel slope, geometry, roughness, and boundary conditions. No additional calibration
                of the model was performed as it only serves as a benchmark representative of ESMs rather than training data. We
                employed two spatial resolutions (Δx = 2,000 m and 5,000 m), which are among the highest resolutions available
                in ESMs. Comparison of ESM predictions with the TELEMAC reference (Figure S14 in Supporting Informa-
                tion S1) indicates that coarser resolutions introduce significant errors in simulating CF dynamics in this region.
                While the ESM model can capture the propagation of tides and storm surges, it struggles to accurately simulate
                areas dominated by upstream discharge and the transition zone where tide‐surge‐discharge interactions occur.
                This is due to unresolved flow dynamics, particularly in regions where bathymetric changes cause rapid shifts in
                flow regimes. Such ESM performance is expected to degrade further in regions with more complex hydrodynamic
                conditions.
                At three locations representing different hydrodynamic regimes—tidal‐dominated (x = 10,000 m), transition zone
                (x = 60,000 m), and discharge‐dominated (x = 65,000 m)—we evaluated the ESMs (Figures 12a–12c), PINNs
                (Figures 12d–12f), and data‐driven models trained on 100 and 800 samples (Figures 12g–12l) against the
                TELEMAC reference solution. The assessment was based on bias (i.e., MAE) and the ability to capture temporal
                variation (i.e., R2) (Figure 13).
                The comparisons highlight a significant improvement of ML‐based models over ESMs. In the tidal zone, all three
                approaches effectively capture the time series variations driven by tide and storm surge (Figures 12a–12d, 12g and
                12j). However, PINNs, especially FD‐PINN, show substantial improvements over ESMs in the transition and
                discharge‐dominated regions, due to their combined use of physics‐informed constraints and assimilated
                observational data. Notably, the largest bias during peak discharge events in the discharge‐dominated region is
                reduced by 0.5 and 1.5 m, compared with ESMs at 2,000 m and 5,000 m resolutions, respectively (Figures 12c and
                12f). Among data‐driven models, those trained on 800 samples (except CNN‐Conv and U‐Net) achieve higher
                accuracy in these regions (Figures 12h, 12i, 12k and 12l). However, as these models rely entirely on training data
                without physics constraints and data assimilation, their predictions do not correlate as well as PINNs. This is
                further reflected in MAE and R2 values at x = 60,000 and 65,000 m (Figure 13), where PINNs show larger MAEs
                than data‐driven models but achieve higher R2 values, indicating better alignment with observed temporal
                variations.
                To complement the time series comparisons, we also present along‐channel water depth profiles at three
                representative time instances, that is, storm surge peak, discharge peak, and post‐storm, in the supplementary
                materials (Figures S15 and S16 in Supporting Information S1). These spatial comparisons confirm the improved


FENG ET AL.                                                                                                                  19 of 27
                                                                                                                                                                              29935210, 2025, 4, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2025JH000758 by Battelle - Pacific Northwest Division, Wiley Online Library on [06/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
                                     JGR: Machine Learning and Computation                                                                10.1029/2025JH000758




Figure 12. Comparison of water depth time series during the Hurricane Irene event between TELEMAC reference solution and ESMs' with Δx = 2,000 m and 5,000 m
(a, b and c), PINNs' (d, e and f) and data‐driven models' trained on 100 (dash lines) and 800 (solid lines) samples (g–l) at three locations x = 10,000 m (a, d, g, and i),
x = 60,000 m (b, e, h, and k) and x = 65,000 m (c, f, i, and l).

                                           accuracy of PINNs and data‐driven models over coarse‐resolution ESMs, particularly in the transition zone and
                                           during the storm surge and discharge peaks.


                                           5.2.2. Toward Integration Into Earth System Models
                                           The FD‐PINN algorithm and the data generation schemes for data‐driven models are highly adaptable and can be
                                           applied to any domains affected by compound riverine and coastal flood drivers. These ML models can be




                                           Figure 13. Evaluation metrics of ESMs, PINNs, and data‐driven models corresponding to the time series comparison in
                                           Figure 13.


FENG ET AL.                                                                                                                                                       20 of 27
                                                                                                                                       29935210, 2025, 4, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2025JH000758 by Battelle - Pacific Northwest Division, Wiley Online Library on [06/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
              JGR: Machine Learning and Computation                                                  10.1029/2025JH000758


                seamlessly integrated into an ESM framework through model couplers (Larson et al., 2005), albeit in slightly
                different ways, providing a more flexible and adaptive tool.

                FD‐PINN functions as a PDE solver with online training, making it well‐suited for direct integration as a new
                ESM component. It receives inputs from the river and ocean components of the ESM, solves the governing
                equations at the given coupling interval, and returns the solution to other components through the coupler. The
                operational scale of FD‐PINN aligns with that of a global ocean component, enabling smooth interaction within
                the ESM framework. In contrast, data‐driven models rely on pretraining with historical data and perform rapid
                inference when provided with new inputs. This distinction highlights the advantage of using ML as a lightweight
                and scalable alternative for embedding fine‐scale dynamics within ESMs, particularly in scenarios where
                deploying high‐resolution hydrodynamic solvers across multiple local regions is computationally impractical and
                requires extensive effort for model setup and modeling expertise.
                Since ML models predict much faster than physics‐based ESM components, they can be coupled by assigning a
                shorter coupling interval. ML models can be incorporated into ESMs through a Fortran‐Python interface (Zhang
                et al., 2024) or online data exchange APIs. Integrating these ML models into ESMs not only provides more
                resolved and accurate CF dynamics in localized regions but also improves boundary conditions for its upstream
                and downstream components. This integration effectively overcomes current ESM limitations in predicting
                extreme events, providing a more precise representation of flood interactions across scales.


                5.3. Limitations and Future Work
                5.3.1. Current Limitations and Challenges

                While the developed FD‐PINN has demonstrated significant efficiency over the standard PINN, this study solely
                focuses on the efficiency improvement brought by the algorithm itself to enable a fair comparison with the data‐
                driven models trained on the same CPU. The training efficiency can be further improved without much burden by
                leveraging GPU acceleration (Sharma & Shankar, 2022), which can be up to two times faster than CPU‐based
                training (Lu et al., 2024). Further enhancements, such as adaptive training strategies or hybrid PINN architec-
                tures that incorporate domain decomposition (Jagtap & Karniadakis, 2020), could improve the scalability.
                Implementing transfer learning techniques, where parameters (such as weights and biases) trained on one CF
                event are used as initial parameters for another event, could also reduce training time (Daramola et al., 2024;
                Lippert et al., 2024; Prantikos et al., 2023).
                This study utilizes a realistic river domain extracted from E3SM's river mesh and applies a real hurricane scenario.
                The current SVE formulation assumes a rectangular channel geometry as this choice is consistent with the
                configuration of the river component of E3SM (Feng, Tan et al., 2022; Li et al., 2013). Given the minimal width
                variation in our study domain, this simplification is reasonable. However, we acknowledge that in cases with
                significant cross‐sectional variability or widespread flooding (Fuller et al., 2013), a variable channel width or
                cross‐sectional area or even 2D SWE approximation may be needed to better capture the flow dynamics and
                improve generalizability. Moreover, this study is limited to Hurricane Irene trained with synthetic TELEMAC
                simulations as the comparative framework is intended as a foundational step toward broader applications. We
                note, however, that applying models trained on one numerical model (e.g., TELEMAC) to another would
                introduce inter‐model discrepancies that can complicate interpretation of ML performance. For this reason, we
                retain TELEMAC as a consistent baseline in the present study. Future work should extend the comparative
                framework to other compound flood events and evaluate model performance across independent high‐fidelity
                models and real observational data sets. Such studies will be essential for testing robustness and operational
                readiness.

                This study relies on the synthetic data generated from the TELEMAC simulations. This approach was necessary
                because, although the PINN framework (Figure 2a) is robust, high‐resolution remote sensing data, for example,
                from SWOT, are not yet available. As a result, the experimental design was structured around simulated training
                data. While this allows for controlled benchmarking, it does not fully capture the complexity and uncertainty of
                real‐world observations. Our noise sensitivity analysis indicates that PINNs begin to degrade significantly when
                noise exceeds 5%. This provides a practical benchmark for assessing real‐world data. Data sets with noise lower
                than this threshold may be suitable for integration, whereas higher‐noise observations may reduce framework
                effectiveness. Moving forward, future research should focus on incorporating real satellite observations, such as


FENG ET AL.                                                                                                                21 of 27
                                                                                                                                         29935210, 2025, 4, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2025JH000758 by Battelle - Pacific Northwest Division, Wiley Online Library on [06/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
              JGR: Machine Learning and Computation                                                   10.1029/2025JH000758


                those from SWOT, Landsat, and Sentinel, which will require preprocessing to generate high‐quality satellite data
                products (Rostami et al., 2024; Schumann et al., 2023). Such integration is essential to validate the models'
                generalizability and operational readiness.

                The data‐driven models in this study are trained solely on synthetic data sets generated from hydrodynamic
                simulations without assimilating observational data, which is different from the training of PINNs. While this
                approach ensures full control over training data quality and consistency, it does not take advantage of real‐world
                satellite observations that could be used to constrain or enhance predictions. Incorporating such observational
                inputs would likely require alternative model designs (e.g., hybrid data–model fusion, sequence‐based assimi-
                lation) (Nearing et al., 2021; Penny et al., 2022), which remain a promising direction for future research. Inte-
                grating observational constraints into data‐driven models could also enable fairer comparisons with PINNs, which
                explicitly assimilate satellite snapshots in our framework.
                This study builds upon previous successes and incorporates multiple strategies to achieve satisfactory perfor-
                mance. However, PINN is an actively evolving framework, with ongoing developments introducing new methods
                that could further improve its effectiveness, such as Neural‐Integrated Meshfree (NIM) method (Du & He, 2024)
                that combines differentiable programming with meshfree discretization methods, adaptive sampling strategies to
                refine collocation point selection (Zhao et al., 2024), physics‐informed attention mechanisms to enhance feature
                extraction (Jiang et al., 2025), and Multi‐Scale Deep Neural Networks (MscaleDNNs) that addresses multi‐scale
                frequency features (Huang et al., 2025). Additionally, developing hybrid models that combine PINNs with data‐
                driven approaches could provide a balanced trade‐off between computational efficiency and physical interpret-
                ability in CF modeling (Zhang et al., 2023).
                While this study focuses on model accuracy and efficiency, interpretability, and uncertainty quantification are
                equally important for real‐world applications. Future work could incorporate explainable AI techniques, such as
                SHAP (Lundberg & Lee, 2017) or Layer‐wise Relevance Propagation (Bach et al., 2015), to improve trans-
                parency in data‐driven models. For PINNs, recent work has introduced Bayesian PINNs (Zou & Karniada-
                kis, 2025) and ensemble‐based PINNs (Soibam et al., 2024) to estimate predictive uncertainty. These additions
                would enhance the framework's robustness and support more realistic applications.

                5.3.2. Outlook and Future Directions
                Traditional implementations of ML in ESMs often focus on developing global emulators (Alizadeh et al., 2020;
                Price et al., 2025; Ullrich et al., 2025) or tuning model parameters (Feng, Liu et al., 2022). However, an alternative
                approach is to leverage ML at targeted local scales where traditional ESM components face the greatest chal-
                lenges. Instead of a single ML model for an entire domain, multiple specialized ML models can be deployed at
                sensitive regions, such as river deltas, coastal estuaries, and major floodplains or even a small portion of them.
                These models can be modularly integrated within the ESM framework, interfacing through a shared API or data‐
                exchange layer to provide higher‐resolution physics only where needed. This design improves ESM performance
                where needed while avoiding unnecessary computational overhead elsewhere. Such an approach offers a scalable
                adaptive solution for enhancing flood modeling within ESMs, bridging the gap between coarse global ESM
                simulations and local hydrodynamic accuracy under increasing hydrometeorological extremes.
                Within this broader vision, the specific bottleneck our study addresses is the integration of high‐resolution flood
                dynamics into ESMs, which cannot practically operate at the resolutions required to capture CF at river–ocean
                interfaces. CF is used here as a representative example of the resolution mismatch between coarse river and
                fine ocean components (see Figure S1 in Supporting Information S1 and Section 3.1). High‐resolution numerical
                models could, in principle, resolve these dynamics locally, but their setup demands substantial computational
                resources, specialized expertise, and repeated effort if applied across many regions globally. In contrast, ESMs
                are already configured for global coverage and include processes such as surface hydrology, biogeochemistry,
                and sediment transport, making selective downscaling a more practical approach for improving performance at
                critical interfaces. Purely data‐driven surrogates such as CNN‐LSTM also depend on high‐resolution model
                output for pretraining, requiring the same costly setup. PINNs, by contrast, function as physics‐constrained PDE
                solvers that require only boundary conditions from coarse ESMs and optional observational data. They also
                provide a natural framework for assimilating sparse observations in space and time while preserving physical
                consistency (see Figures 12 and 13 and Section 5.2.1). This unique capability, difficult to achieve with purely
                data‐driven surrogates, marks the potential role of FD‐PINN in future operational systems.


FENG ET AL.                                                                                                                  22 of 27
                                                                                                                                                                                                 29935210, 2025, 4, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2025JH000758 by Battelle - Pacific Northwest Division, Wiley Online Library on [06/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
                                        JGR: Machine Learning and Computation                                                                          10.1029/2025JH000758


                                            Simulating CF in a 1D channel at the river‐ocean interface serves as the first step. For cases requiring 2D or 3D
                                            physics, the PINN model can be seamlessly extended to solve the SWE (Qi et al., 2024) or Navier‐Stokes (NS)
                                            (Jin et al., 2021) equations with minimal modifications to the existing code. Such extensions introduce additional
                                            challenges. For PINNs, higher‐dimensional spaces may significantly increase computational demands due to the
                                            larger number of collocation points and more complex governing evaluations. Similarly, scaling data‐driven
                                            models to 2D or 3D domains requires larger training data sets and more complex network architectures to
                                            effectively capture spatial dependencies across multiple dimensions.

                                            6. Conclusions
                                            This study evaluates physics‐informed and data‐driven neural networks for simulating compound flooding at the
                                            river‐ocean interface, with the broader goal of enhancing large‐scale ESM frameworks for more accurate sim-
                                            ulations in locally challenging regions. A finite‐difference‐based PINN (FD‐PINN) was developed to enhance
                                            computational efficiency, achieving a 6.5 × speedup over standard PINN while maintaining accuracy. Addi-
                                            tionally, a new data‐generation approach was introduced to ensure robust training data sets for data‐driven
                                            models. Comparative analysis reveals that while the fully connected CNN (CNN‐FC) achieves the best overall
                                            performance, it comes at a high computational cost. The hybrid CNN‐LSTM, along with LSTM and GRU,
                                            provides a favorable balance between accuracy and generalization, particularly for unseen events. In contrast,
                                            CNN‐Conv and U‐Net show limited generalization. These findings highlight the trade‐offs between physics‐
                                            informed and purely data‐driven methods, demonstrating the potential of integrating adaptive ML tools in
                                            ESM frameworks for improving extreme event modeling at local regions. Future work should explore integrating
                                            satellite observations and extending PINNs to higher‐dimensional hydrodynamic simulations, further enhancing
                                            predictive capabilities in climate‐driven hydroclimatic risk assessments.

                                            Conflict of Interest
                                            The authors declare no conflicts of interest relevant to this study.

                                            Data Availability Statement
                                            All data and code used to produce the results of this study are publicly available at Feng (2025).


Acknowledgments                             References
The work presented in this manuscript is
supported by the Earth System Model         Abadi, M., Barham, P., Chen, J., Chen, Z., Davis, A., Dean, J., et al. (2016). {TensorFlow}: A system for {Large‐Scale} machine learning. In 12th
Development program areas of the U.S.         USENIX symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI 16).
Department of Energy, Office of Science,    Alizadeh, R., Allen, J. K., & Mistree, F. (2020). Managing computational complexity using surrogate models: A critical review. Research in
Office of Biological and Environmental        Engineering Design, 31(3), 275–298. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00163‐020‐00336‐7
Research as part of the multi‐program       Atashi, V., Kardan, R., Gorji, H. T., & Lim, Y. H. (2023). Comparative study of deep learning LSTM and 1D‐CNN models for real‐time flood
collaborative Integrated Coastal Modeling     prediction in Red River of the north, USA. In 2023 IEEE international conference on electro Information Technology (eIT).
(ICoM) project (Grant KP1703110/            Avand, M., Moradi, H., & lasboyee, M. R. (2021). Using machine learning models, remote sensing, and GIS to investigate the effects of changing
75415). All model simulations were            climates and land uses on flood probability. Journal of Hydrology, 595, 125663. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhydrol.2020.125663
performed using resources available         Avila, L. A., & Cangialosi, J. (2011). Tropical cyclone report, hurricane Irene, 21–28 August 2011. U.S. National Hurricane Center. Retrieved
through Research Computing at Pacific         from http://www.nhc.noaa.gov/data/tcr/AL092011_Irene.pdf
Northwest National Laboratory (PNNL).       Bach, S., Binder, A., Montavon, G., Klauschen, F., Müller, K.‐R., & Samek, W. (2015). On pixel‐wise explanations for non‐linear classifier
PNNL is operated for DOE by Battelle          decisions by layer‐wise relevance propagation. PLoS One, 10(7), e0130140. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0130140
Memorial Institute, United States under     Betancourt, J., Bachoc, F., Klein, T., Idier, D., Pedreros, R., & Rohmer, J. (2020). Gaussian process metamodeling of functional‐input code for
contract DE‐AC05‐76RL01830.                   coastal flood hazard assessment. Reliability Engineering and System Safety, 198, 106870. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ress.2020.106870
                                            Bevacqua, E., Maraun, D., Vousdoukas, M., Voukouvalas, E., Vrac, M., Mentaschi, L., & Widmann, M. (2019). Higher probability of compound
                                              flooding from precipitation and storm surge in Europe under anthropogenic climate change. Science Advances, 5(9), eaaw5531. https://doi.org/
                                              10.1126/sciadv.aaw5531
                                            Brunner, G. W., Piper, S. S., Jensen, M. R., & Chacon, B. (2015). Combined 1D and 2D hydraulic modeling within HEC‐RAS. In World
                                              environmental and water resources congress 2015 (pp. 1432–1443). American Society of Civil Engineers. https://doi.org/10.1061/
                                              9780784479162.141
                                            Brunton, S. L., & Kutz, J. N. (2022). Data‐driven science and engineering: Machine learning, dynamical systems, and control. Cambridge
                                              University Press.
                                            Cai, S., Mao, Z., Wang, Z., Yin, M., & Karniadakis, G. E. (2021). Physics‐Informed Neural Networks (PINNs) for fluid mechanics: A review.
                                              Acta Mechanica Sinica, 37(12), 1727–1738. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10409‐021‐01148‐1
                                            Camps‐Valls, G., Tuia, D., Zhu, X. X., & Reichstein, M. (2021). Deep learning for the Earth sciences: A comprehensive approach to remote
                                              sensing, climate science and geosciences. John Wiley and Sons.
                                            Chen, W., Li, Y., Xue, W., Shahabi, H., Li, S., Hong, H., et al. (2020). Modeling flood susceptibility using data‐driven approaches of Naïve Bayes
                                              tree, alternating decision tree, and random forest methods. Science of the Total Environment, 701, 134979. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.
                                              2019.134979



FENG ET AL.                                                                                                                                                                       23 of 27
                                                                                                                                                                        29935210, 2025, 4, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2025JH000758 by Battelle - Pacific Northwest Division, Wiley Online Library on [06/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
              JGR: Machine Learning and Computation                                                                          10.1029/2025JH000758


                Crompton, O., Sytsma, A., & Thompson, S. (2019). Emulation of the Saint Venant equations enables rapid and accurate predictions of infiltration
                   and overland flow velocity on spatially heterogeneous surfaces. Water Resources Research, 55(8), 7108–7129. https://doi.org/10.1029/
                   2019WR025146
                Cuomo, S., De Rosa, M., Giampaolo, F., Izzo, S., & Di Cola, V. S. (2023). Solving groundwater flow equation using physics‐informed neural
                   networks. Computers and Mathematics with Applications, 145, 106–123. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.camwa.2023.05.036
                Cuomo, S., Di Cola, V. S., Giampaolo, F., Rozza, G., Raissi, M., & Piccialli, F. (2022). Scientific machine learning through physics–informed
                   neural networks: Where we are and what’s next. Journal of Scientific Computing, 92(3), 88. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10915‐022‐01939‐z
                Daramola, S., Muñoz, D. F., Muñoz, P., Saksena, S., & Irish, J. L. (2024). Predicting the evolution of extreme water levels with long short‐term
                   memory station‐based approximated models and transfer learning techniques. Authorea Preprints. https://doi.org/10.22541/essoar.172926660.
                   06621930/v1
                Dazzi, S. (2024). Physics‐informed neural networks for the augmented system of shallow water equations with topography. Water Resources
                   Research, 60(10), e2023WR036589. https://doi.org/10.1029/2023WR036589
                Dey, H., Haque, M. M., Shao, W., VanDyke, M., & Hao, F. (2024). Simulating flood risk in Tampa Bay using a machine learning driven approach.
                   npj Natural Hazards, 1(1), 1–16. https://doi.org/10.1038/s44304‐024‐00045‐4
                Di Bacco, M., Contento, A., & Scorzini, A. R. (2024). Exploring the compound nature of coastal flooding by tropical cyclones: A machine
                   learning framework. Journal of Hydrology, 645, 132262. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhydrol.2024.132262
                Domeneghetti, A., Schumann, G.‐P., Frasson, R., Wei, R., Pavelsky, T., Castellarin, A., et al. (2018). Characterizing water surface elevation under
                   different flow conditions for the upcoming SWOT mission. Journal of Hydrology, 561, 848–861. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhydrol.2018.04.046
                Du, H., & He, Q. (2024). Neural‐Integrated Meshfree (NIM) Method: A differentiable programming‐based hybrid solver for computational
                   mechanics. Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering, 427, 117024. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cma.2024.117024
                Eilander, D., Couasnon, A., Ikeuchi, H., Muis, S., Yamazaki, D., Winsemius, H. C., & Ward, P. J. (2020). The effect of surge on riverine flood
                   hazard and impact in deltas globally. Environmental Research Letters, 15(10), 104007. https://doi.org/10.1088/1748‐9326/ab8ca6
                Fang, K., Shen, C., Kifer, D., & Yang, X. (2017). Prolongation of SMAP to spatiotemporally seamless coverage of continental US using a deep
                   learning neural network. Geophysical Research Letters, 44(21), 11030–11039. https://doi.org/10.1002/2017GL075619
                Feng, D. (2025). Data and code for 'A comparative study of physics‐informed and data‐driven neural networks for compound flood simulation at
                   river‐ocean interfaces: A case study of Hurricane Irene [Dataset]. Figshare. https://doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.28890083.v2
                Feng, D., Liu, J., Lawson, K., & Shen, C. (2022). Differentiable, learnable, regionalized process‐based models with multiphysical outputs can
                   approach state‐of‐the‐art hydrologic prediction accuracy. Water Resources Research, 58(10), e2022WR032404. https://doi.org/10.1029/
                   2022WR032404
                Feng, D., Tan, Z., Engwirda, D., Liao, C., Xu, D., Bisht, G., et al. (2022). Investigating coastal backwater effects and flooding in the coastal zone
                   using a global river transport model on an unstructured mesh. Hydrology and Earth System Sciences, 26(21), 5473–5491. https://doi.org/10.
                   5194/hess‐26‐5473‐2022
                Feng, D., Tan, Z., Engwirda, D., Wolfe, J. D., Xu, D., Liao, C., et al. (2024). Simulation of compound flooding using river‐ocean two‐way coupled
                   E3SM ensemble on variable‐resolution meshes. Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems, 16(6), e2023MS004054. https://doi.org/10.
                   1029/2023MS004054
                Feng, D., Tan, Z., & He, Q. (2023). Physics‐Informed neural networks of the Saint‐Venant equations for downscaling a large‐scale river model.
                   Water Resources Research, 59(2), e2022WR033168. https://doi.org/10.1029/2022WR033168
                Feng, D., Tan, Z., Pinel, S., Xu, D., Amaral, J. H. F., Fassoni‐Andrade, A. C., et al. (2025). Drivers and impacts of sediment deposition in
                   Amazonian floodplains. Nature Communications, 16(1), 3148. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467‐025‐57495‐1
                Feng, D., Tan, Z., Xu, D., & Leung, L. R. (2023). Understanding the compound flood risk along the coast of the contiguous United States.
                   Hydrology and Earth System Sciences, 27(21), 3911–3934. https://doi.org/10.5194/hess‐27‐3911‐2023
                Fraehr, N., Wang, Q. J., Wu, W., & Nathan, R. (2025). Generation and selection of training events for surrogate flood inundation models. Journal
                   of Environmental Management, 373, 123570. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvman.2024.123570
                Frame, J. M., Kratzert, F., Klotz, D., Gauch, M., Shalev, G., Gilon, O., et al. (2022). Deep learning rainfall–runoff predictions of extreme events.
                   Hydrology and Earth System Sciences, 26(13), 3377–3392. https://doi.org/10.5194/hess‐26‐3377‐2022
                Fuller, I., Reid, H., & Brierley, G. (2013). Methods in geomorphology: Investigating river channel form. In Treatise on geomorphology: Methods
                   in geomorphology (pp. 73–91). Elsevier. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978‐0‐12‐374739‐6.00374‐2
                Getirana, A., Kumar, S., Bates, P., Boone, A., Lettenmaier, D., & Munier, S. (2024). The SWOT mission will reshape our understanding of the
                   global terrestrial water cycle. Nature Water, 2(12), 1139–1142. https://doi.org/10.1038/s44221‐024‐00352‐0
                Girosi, F., Jones, M., & Poggio, T. (1995). Regularization theory and neural networks architectures. Neural Computation, 7(2), 219–269. https://
                   doi.org/10.1162/neco.1995.7.2.219
                Glorot, X., & Bengio, Y. (2010). Understanding the difficulty of training deep feedforward neural networks. In Proceedings of the thirteenth
                   international conference on artificial intelligence and statistics.
                Golaz, J. C., Caldwell, P. M., Van Roekel, L. P., Petersen, M. R., Tang, Q., Wolfe, J. D., et al. (2019). The DOE E3SM coupled model version 1:
                   Overview and evaluation at standard resolution. Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems, 11(7), 2089–2129. https://doi.org/10.1029/
                   2018MS001603
                Golaz, J. C., Van Roekel, L. P., Zheng, X., Roberts, A. F., Wolfe, J. D., Lin, W., et al. (2022). The DOE E3SM Model Version 2: Overview of the
                   physical model and initial model evaluation. Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems, 14(12), e2022MS003156. https://doi.org/10.
                   1029/2022ms003156
                Graves, A., & Graves, A. (2012). Long short‐term memory. Supervised sequence labelling with recurrent neural networks, 37–45. https://doi.org/
                   10.1007/978‐3‐642‐24797‐2_4
                Hasan, M. H., Ahmed, A., Nafee, K., & Hossen, M. A. (2023). Use of machine learning algorithms to assess flood susceptibility in the coastal area
                   of Bangladesh. Ocean and Coastal Management, 236, 106503. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ocecoaman.2023.106503
                He, Q., Barajas‐Solano, D., Tartakovsky, G., & Tartakovsky, A. M. (2020). Physics‐informed neural networks for multiphysics data assimilation
                   with application to subsurface transport. Advances in Water Resources, 141, 103610. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.advwatres.2020.103610
                He, Q., & Tartakovsky, A. M. (2021). Physics‐informed neural network method for forward and backward advection‐dispersion equations. Water
                   Resources Research, 57(7), e2020WR029479. https://doi.org/10.1029/2020WR029479
                Hervouet, J. M. (2000). A high resolution 2‐D dam‐break model using parallelization. Hydrological Processes, 14(13), 2211–2230. https://doi.
                   org/10.1002/1099‐1085(200009)14:13<2211::AID‐HYP24>3.0.CO;2‐8
                Hoch, J. M., Neal, J. C., Baart, F., Van Beek, R., Winsemius, H. C., Bates, P. D., & Bierkens, M. F. (2017). GLOFRIM v1. 0–A globally applicable
                   computational framework for integrated hydrological–hydrodynamic modelling. Geoscientific Model Development, 10(10), 3913–3929.
                   https://doi.org/10.5194/gmd‐10‐3913‐2017



FENG ET AL.                                                                                                                                              24 of 27
                                                                                                                                                                       29935210, 2025, 4, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2025JH000758 by Battelle - Pacific Northwest Division, Wiley Online Library on [06/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
              JGR: Machine Learning and Computation                                                                         10.1029/2025JH000758


                Hodges, B. R. (2013). Challenges in continental river dynamics. Environmental Modelling and Software, 50, 16–20. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
                   envsoft.2013.08.010
                Hou, J., Zhou, N., Chen, G., Huang, M., & Bai, G. (2021). Rapid forecasting of urban flood inundation using multiple machine learning models.
                   Natural Hazards, 108(2), 2335–2356. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11069‐021‐04782‐x
                Hou, Q., Li, Y., Singh, V. P., & Sun, Z. (2024). Physics‐informed neural network for diffusive wave model. Journal of Hydrology, 637, 131261.
                   https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhydrol.2024.131261
                Huang, J., You, R., & Zhou, T. (2025). Frequency‐adaptive multi‐scale deep neural networks. Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and
                   Engineering, 437, 117751. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cma.2025.117751
                Ikeuchi, H., Hirabayashi, Y., Yamazaki, D., Muis, S., Ward, P. J., Winsemius, H. C., et al. (2017). Compound simulation of fluvial floods and
                   storm surges in a global coupled river‐coast flood model: Model development and its application to 2007 Cyclone Sidr in Bangladesh. Journal
                   of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems, 9(4), 1847–1862. https://doi.org/10.1002/2017MS000943
                Iman, R. L. (2008). Latin hypercube sampling. John Wiley and Sons, Ltd.
                Jafarzadegan, K., Moradkhani, H., Pappenberger, F., Moftakhari, H., Bates, P., Abbaszadeh, P., et al. (2023). Recent advances and new frontiers in
                   riverine and coastal flood modeling. Reviews of Geophysics, 61(2), e2022RG000788. https://doi.org/10.1029/2022RG000788
                Jagtap, A. D., & Karniadakis, G. E. (2020). Extended Physics‐Informed Neural Networks (XPINNs): A generalized space‐time domain
                   decomposition based deep learning framework for nonlinear partial differential equations. Communications in Computational Physics, 28(5),
                   2002–2041. https://doi.org/10.4208/cicp.oa‐2020‐0164
                Jiang, F., Hou, X., & Xia, M. (2025). Spatio‐temporal attention‐based hidden physics‐informed neural network for remaining useful life pre-
                   diction. Advanced Engineering Informatics, 63, 102958. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aei.2024.102958
                Jiang, Q., Shu, C., Zhu, L., Yang, L., Liu, Y., & Zhang, Z. (2023). Applications of finite difference‐based physics‐informed neural networks to
                   steady incompressible isothermal and thermal flows. International Journal for Numerical Methods in Fluids, 95(10), 1565–1597. https://doi.
                   org/10.1002/fld.5217
                Jiang, S., Bevacqua, E., & Zscheischler, J. (2022). River flooding mechanisms and their changes in Europe revealed by explainable machine
                   learning. Hydrology and Earth System Sciences, 26(24), 6339–6359. https://doi.org/10.5194/hess‐26‐6339‐2022
                Jin, X., Cai, S., Li, H., & Karniadakis, G. E. (2021). NSFnets (Navier‐Stokes flow nets): Physics‐informed neural networks for the incompressible
                   Navier‐Stokes equations. Journal of Computational Physics, 426, 109951. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcp.2020.109951
                Kabir, S., Patidar, S., Xia, X., Liang, Q., Neal, J., & Pender, G. (2020). A deep convolutional neural network model for rapid prediction of fluvial
                   flood inundation. Journal of Hydrology, 590, 125481. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhydrol.2020.125481
                Karniadakis, G. E., Kevrekidis, I. G., Lu, L., Perdikaris, P., Wang, S., & Yang, L. (2021). Physics‐informed machine learning. Nature Reviews
                   Physics, 3(6), 422–440. https://doi.org/10.1038/s42254‐021‐00314‐5
                Khosravi, K., Pham, B. T., Chapi, K., Shirzadi, A., Shahabi, H., Revhaug, I., et al. (2018). A comparative assessment of decision trees algorithms
                   for flash flood susceptibility modeling at Haraz watershed, northern Iran. Science of the Total Environment, 627, 744–755. https://doi.org/10.
                   1016/j.scitotenv.2018.01.266
                Kim, T., Yang, T., Gao, S., Zhang, L., Ding, Z., Wen, X., et al. (2021). Can artificial intelligence and data‐driven machine learning models match
                   or even replace process‐driven hydrologic models for streamflow simulation? A case study of four watersheds with different hydro‐climatic
                   regions across the CONUS. Journal of Hydrology, 598, 126423. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhydrol.2021.126423
                Kratzert, F., Klotz, D., Brenner, C., Schulz, K., & Herrnegger, M. (2018). Rainfall‐runoff modelling using Long Short‐Term Memory (LSTM)
                   networks. Hydrology and Earth System Sciences, 22(11), 6005–6022. https://doi.org/10.5194/hess‐22‐6005‐2018
                Lang, M., Ouarda, T. B., & Bobée, B. (1999). Towards operational guidelines for over‐threshold modeling. Journal of Hydrology, 225(3–4), 103–
                   117. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0022‐1694(99)00167‐5
                Larson, J., Jacob, R., & Ong, E. (2005). The model coupling toolkit: A new Fortran90 toolkit for building multiphysics parallel coupled models.
                   The International Journal of High Performance Computing Applications, 19(3), 277–292. https://doi.org/10.1177/1094342005056115
                Le, X.‐H., Ho, H. V., Lee, G., & Jung, S. (2019). Application of Long Short‐Term Memory (LSTM) neural network for flood forecasting. Water,
                   11(7), 1387. https://doi.org/10.3390/w11071387
                Le, X.‐H., Nguyen, D.‐H., Jung, S., Yeon, M., & Lee, G. (2021). Comparison of deep learning techniques for river streamflow forecasting. IEEE
                   Access, 9, 71805–71820. https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2021.3077703
                Lee, C.‐C., Huang, L., Antolini, F., Garcia, M., Juan, A., Brody, S. D., & Mostafavi, A. (2024). Predicting peak inundation depths with a physics
                   informed machine learning model. Scientific Reports, 14(1), 14826. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598‐024‐65570‐8
                Lei, X., Chen, W., Panahi, M., Falah, F., Rahmati, O., Uuemaa, E., et al. (2021). Urban flood modeling using deep‐learning approaches in Seoul,
                   South Korea. Journal of Hydrology, 601, 126684. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhydrol.2021.126684
                Li, A., Zhang, W., Zhang, X., Chen, G., Liu, X., Jiang, A., et al. (2024). A deep U‐Net‐ConvLSTM framework with hydrodynamic model for
                   basin‐scale hydrodynamic prediction. Water, 16(5), 625. https://doi.org/10.3390/w16050625
                Li, H., Wigmosta, M. S., Wu, H., Huang, M., Ke, Y., Coleman, A. M., & Leung, L. R. (2013). A physically based runoff routing model for land
                   surface and Earth system models. Journal of Hydrometeorology, 14(3), 808–828. https://doi.org/10.1175/JHM‐D‐12‐015.1
                Li, J., Li, L., Zhang, T., Xing, H., Shi, Y., Li, Z., et al. (2024). Flood forecasting based on radar precipitation nowcasting using U‐net and its
                   improved models. Journal of Hydrology, 632, 130871. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhydrol.2024.130871
                Lilly, J. R., Capodaglio, G., Petersen, M. R., Brus, S. R., Engwirda, D., & Higdon, R. L. (2023). Storm surge modeling as an application of local
                   time‐stepping in MPAS‐Ocean. Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems, 15(1), e2022MS003327. https://doi.org/10.1029/
                   2022MS003327
                Lim, K. L., Dutta, R., & Rotaru, M. (2022). Physics informed neural network using finite difference method. In 2022 IEEE international con-
                   ference on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics (SMC).
                Lippert, J. R., von Tresckow, M., De Gersem, H., & Loukrezis, D. (2024). Transfer learning‐based physics‐informed neural networks for
                   magnetostatic field simulation with domain variations. International Journal of Numerical Modelling: Electronic Networks, Devices and
                   Fields, 37(4), e3264. https://doi.org/10.1002/jnm.3264
                Liu, L., Liu, S., Xie, H., Xiong, F., Yu, T., Xiao, M., et al. (2024). Discontinuity computing using physics‐informed neural networks. Journal of
                   Scientific Computing, 98(1), 22. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10915‐023‐02412‐1
                Lu, K.‐l., Su, Y.‐m., Bi, Z., Qiu, C., & Zhang, W.‐j. (2024). Characteristic performance study on solving oscillator ODEs via soft‐constrained
                   physics‐informed neural network with small data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.11077. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2408.11077
                Lundberg, S. M., & Lee, S.‐I. (2017). A unified approach to interpreting model predictions. Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-
                   tems, 30.
                Luo, X., Yuan, S., Tang, H., Xu, D., Ran, Q., Cen, Y., & Liang, D. (2024). Enhanced physics‐informed neural networks for efficient modelling of
                   hydrodynamics in river networks. Hydrological Processes, 38(4), e15143. https://doi.org/10.1002/hyp.15143



FENG ET AL.                                                                                                                                             25 of 27
                                                                                                                                                                         29935210, 2025, 4, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2025JH000758 by Battelle - Pacific Northwest Division, Wiley Online Library on [06/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
              JGR: Machine Learning and Computation                                                                           10.1029/2025JH000758


                Ma, M., Zhao, G., He, B., Li, Q., Dong, H., Wang, S., & Wang, Z. (2021). XGBoost‐based method for flash flood risk assessment. Journal of
                   Hydrology, 598, 126382. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhydrol.2021.126382
                Maxwell, R. M., Condon, L. E., & Melchior, P. (2021). A physics‐informed, machine learning emulator of a 2D surface water model: What
                   temporal networks and simulation‐based inference can help Us learn about hydrologic processes. Water, 13(24), 3633. https://doi.org/10.3390/
                   w13243633
                Moradian, S., AghaKouchak, A., Gharbia, S., Broderick, C., & Olbert, A. I. (2024). Forecasting of compound ocean‐fluvial floods using machine
                   learning. Journal of Environmental Management, 364, 121295. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvman.2024.121295
                Muñoz, D. F., Muñoz, P., Moftakhari, H., & Moradkhani, H. (2021). From local to regional compound flood mapping with deep learning and data
                   fusion techniques. Science of the Total Environment, 782, 146927. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2021.146927
                Nearing, G., Cohen, D., Dube, V., Gauch, M., Gilon, O., Harrigan, S., et al. (2024). Global prediction of extreme floods in ungauged watersheds.
                   Nature, 627(8004), 559–563. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586‐024‐07145‐1
                Nearing, G. S., Klotz, D., Sampson, A. K., Kratzert, F., Gauch, M., Frame, J. M., et al. (2021). Data assimilation and autoregression for using near‐
                   real‐time streamflow observations in long short‐term memory networks. Hydrology and Earth System Sciences Discussions, 2021, 1–25.
                   https://doi.org/10.5194/hess‐26‐5493‐2022
                Nevo, S., Morin, E., Gerzi Rosenthal, A., Metzger, A., Barshai, C., Weitzner, D., et al. (2022). Flood forecasting with machine learning models in
                   an operational framework. Hydrology and Earth System Sciences, 26(15), 4013–4032. https://doi.org/10.5194/hess‐26‐4013‐2022
                Niu, J., Xu, W., Qiu, H., Li, S., & Dong, F. (2023). 1‐D coupled surface flow and transport equations revisited via the physics‐informed neural
                   network approach. Journal of Hydrology, 625, 130048. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhydrol.2023.130048
                Olbert, A. I., Moradian, S., Nash, S., Comer, J., Kazmierczak, B., Falconer, R. A., & Hartnett, M. (2023). Combined statistical and hydrodynamic
                   modelling of compound flooding in coastal areas‐methodology and application. Journal of Hydrology, 620, 129383. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
                   jhydrol.2023.129383
                Ouma, Y. O., & Omai, L. (2023). Flood susceptibility mapping using image‐based 2D‐CNN deep learning: Overview and case study application
                   using multiparametric spatial data in data‐scarce urban environments. International Journal of Intelligent Systems, 2023(1), 5672401. https://
                   doi.org/10.1155/2023/5672401
                Pan, M., Zhou, H., Cao, J., Liu, Y., Hao, J., Li, S., & Chen, C.‐H. (2020). Water level prediction model based on GRU and CNN. IEEE Access, 8,
                   60090–60100. https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2020.2982433
                Panahi, M., Dodangeh, E., Rezaie, F., Khosravi, K., Van Le, H., Lee, M.‐J., et al. (2021). Flood spatial prediction modeling using a hybrid of meta‐
                   optimization and support vector regression modeling. Catena, 199, 105114. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.catena.2020.105114
                Pang, M. (2024). Efficient river hydrodynamics modelling in realistic river systems using a fourier neural operator‐based network. Journal of
                   Hydrology, 637, 131345. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhydrol.2024.131345
                Panigrahi, B. K., Nath, T. K., & Senapati, M. R. (2019). An application of local linear radial basis function neural network for flood prediction.
                   Journal of Management Analytics, 6(1), 67–87. https://doi.org/10.1080/23270012.2019.1566033
                Penny, S. G., Smith, T. A., Chen, T. C., Platt, J. A., Lin, H. Y., Goodliff, M., & Abarbanel, H. D. (2022). Integrating recurrent neural networks with
                   data assimilation for scalable data‐driven state estimation. Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems, 14(3), e2021MS002843. https://doi.
                   org/10.1029/2021MS002843
                Pham, B. T., Jaafari, A., Van Phong, T., Yen, H. P. H., Tuyen, T. T., Van Luong, V., et al. (2021). Improved flood susceptibility mapping using a
                   best first decision tree integrated with ensemble learning techniques. Geoscience Frontiers, 12(3), 101105. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gsf.2020.
                   11.003
                Prantikos, K., Chatzidakis, S., Tsoukalas, L. H., & Heifetz, A. (2023). Physics‐informed neural network with transfer learning (TL‐PINN) based
                   on domain similarity measure for prediction of nuclear reactor transients. Scientific Reports, 13(1), 16840. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598‐023‐
                   43325‐1
                Price, I., Sanchez‐Gonzalez, A., Alet, F., Andersson, T. R., El‐Kadi, A., Masters, D., et al. (2025). Probabilistic weather forecasting with machine
                   learning. Nature, 637(8044), 84–90. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586‐024‐08252‐9
                Qi, X., de Almeida, G. A., & Maldonado, S. (2024). Physics‐informed neural networks for solving flow problems modeled by the 2D shallow
                   water equations without labeled data. Journal of Hydrology, 636, 131263. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhydrol.2024.131263
                Raissi, M., Perdikaris, P., & Karniadakis, G. E. (2019). Physics‐informed neural networks: A deep learning framework for solving forward and
                   inverse problems involving nonlinear partial differential equations. Journal of Computational Physics, 378, 686–707. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
                   jcp.2018.10.045
                Reichstein, M., Camps‐Valls, G., Stevens, B., Jung, M., Denzler, J., Carvalhais, N., & Prabhat, F. (2019). Deep learning and process under-
                   standing for data‐driven Earth system science. Nature, 566(7743), 195–204. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586‐019‐0912‐1
                Rostami, A., Chang, C.‐H., Lee, H., Wan, H.‐H., Du, T. L. T., Markert, K. N., et al. (2024). Forecasting flood inundation in US flood‐prone regions
                   through a data‐driven approach (FIER): Using VIIRS water fractions and the national water model. Remote Sensing, 16(23), 4357. https://doi.
                   org/10.3390/rs16234357
                Santiago‐Collazo, F. L., Bilskie, M. V., & Hagen, S. C. (2019). A comprehensive review of compound inundation models in low‐gradient coastal
                   watersheds. Environmental Modelling and Software, 119, 166–181. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envsoft.2019.06.002
                Sarhadi, A., Rousseau‐Rizzi, R., Mandli, K., Neal, J., Wiper, M. P., Feldmann, M., & Emanuel, K. (2024). Climate change contributions to
                   increasing compound flooding risk in New York city. Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society, 105(2), E337–E356. https://doi.org/10.
                   1175/BAMS‐D‐23‐0177.1
                Schumann, G., Giustarini, L., Tarpanelli, A., Jarihani, B., & Martinis, S. (2023). Flood modeling and prediction using Earth observation data.
                   Surveys in Geophysics, 44(5), 1553–1578. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10712‐022‐09751‐y
                Sharma, R., & Shankar, V. (2022). Accelerated training of Physics‐Informed Neural Networks (PINNs) using meshless discretizations. Advances
                   in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35, 1034–1046.
                Sit, M., Demiray, B. Z., Xiang, Z., Ewing, G. J., Sermet, Y., & Demir, I. (2020). A comprehensive review of deep learning applications in
                   hydrology and water resources. Water Science and Technology, 82(12), 2635–2670. https://doi.org/10.2166/wst.2020.369
                Soibam, J., Aslanidou, I., Kyprianidis, K., & Fdhila, R. B. (2024). Inverse flow prediction using ensemble PINNs and uncertainty quantification.
                   International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer, 226, 125480. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijheatmasstransfer.2024.125480
                Solanki, H., Vegad, U., Kushwaha, A., & Mishra, V. (2025). Improving streamflow prediction using multiple hydrological models and machine
                   learning methods. Water Resources Research, 61(1), e2024WR038192. https://doi.org/10.1029/2024WR038192
                Tian, Y., Ding, S., Su, G., Huang, L., & Chen, J. (2025). Physics‐informed neural networks for solving the two‐dimensional shallow water
                   equations with terrain topography and rainfall source terms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.11372. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2501.11372
                Tran, V. N., Ivanov, V. Y., Xu, D., & Kim, J. (2023). Closing in on hydrologic predictive accuracy: Combining the strengths of high‐fidelity and
                   physics‐agnostic models. Geophysical Research Letters, 50(17), e2023GL104464. https://doi.org/10.1029/2023GL104464



FENG ET AL.                                                                                                                                               26 of 27
                                                                                                                                                                       29935210, 2025, 4, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2025JH000758 by Battelle - Pacific Northwest Division, Wiley Online Library on [06/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
              JGR: Machine Learning and Computation                                                                         10.1029/2025JH000758


                Tsakiri, K., Marsellos, A., & Kapetanakis, S. (2018). Artificial neural network and multiple linear regression for flood prediction in Mohawk
                  River, New York. Water, 10(9), 1158. https://doi.org/10.3390/w10091158
                Turnipseed, D. P., & Sauer, V. B. (2010). Discharge measurements at gaging stations (pp. 2328–7055).
                Ullrich, P. A., Barnes, E. A., Collins, W. D., Dagon, K., Duan, S., Elms, J., et al. (2025). Recommendations for comprehensive and independent
                  evaluation of machine learning‐based Earth system models. Journal of Geophysical Research: Machine Learning and Computation, 2(1),
                  e2024JH000496. https://doi.org/10.1029/2024JH000496
                Wahl, T., Jain, S., Bender, J., Meyers, S. D., & Luther, M. E. (2015). Increasing risk of compound flooding from storm surge and rainfall for major
                  US cities. Nature Climate Change, 5(12), 1093–1097. https://doi.org/10.1038/NCLIMATE2736
                Wang, S., Teng, Y., & Perdikaris, P. (2021). Understanding and mitigating gradient flow pathologies in physics‐informed neural networks. SIAM
                  Journal on Scientific Computing, 43(5), A3055–A3081. https://doi.org/10.1137/20M131804
                Wang, Y., Fang, Z., Hong, H., & Peng, L. (2020). Flood susceptibility mapping using convolutional neural network frameworks. Journal of
                  Hydrology, 582, 124482. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhydrol.2019.124482
                Wang, Y., Shi, L., Hu, X., Song, W., & Wang, L. (2023). Multiphysics‐informed neural networks for coupled soil hydrothermal modeling. Water
                  Resources Research, 59(1), e2022WR031960. https://doi.org/10.1029/2022WR031960
                Ward, N. D., Megonigal, J. P., Bond‐Lamberty, B., Bailey, V. L., Butman, D., Canuel, E. A., et al. (2020). Representing the function and
                  sensitivity of coastal interfaces in Earth system models. Nature Communications, 11(1), 1–14. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467‐020‐16236‐2
                Willard, J., Jia, X., Xu, S., Steinbach, M., & Kumar, V. (2022). Integrating scientific knowledge with machine learning for engineering and
                  environmental systems. ACM Computing Surveys, 55(4), 1–37. https://doi.org/10.1145/3514228
                Wong, J. C., Ooi, C. C., Gupta, A., & Ong, Y.‐S. (2022). Learning in sinusoidal spaces with physics‐informed neural networks. IEEE Transactions
                  on Artificial Intelligence, 5(3), 985–1000. https://doi.org/10.1109/TAI.2022.3192362
                Xiang, Z., Peng, W., Zheng, X., Zhao, X., & Yao, W. (2021). Self‐adaptive loss balanced Physics‐informed neural networks for the incom-
                  pressible Navier‐stokes equations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.06217.
                Xiang, Z., Peng, W., Zhou, W., & Yao, W. (2022). Hybrid finite difference with the physics‐informed neural network for solving PDE in complex
                  geometries. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.07926. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2202.07926
                Xiang, Z., Yan, J., & Demir, I. (2020). A rainfall‐runoff model with LSTM‐based sequence‐to‐sequence learning. Water Resources Research,
                  56(1), e2019WR025326. https://doi.org/10.1029/2019WR025326
                Xu, D., Bisht, G., Engwirda, D., Feng, D., Tan, Z., & Ivanov, V. Y. (2025). Uncertainties in simulating flooding during hurricane Harvey using 2D
                  shallow water equations. Water Resources Research, 61(1), e2024WR038032. https://doi.org/10.1029/2024WR038032
                Xu, D., Bisht, G., Feng, D., Tan, Z., Li, L., Qiu, H., & Leung, L. R. (2024). Impacts of sea‐level rise on coastal groundwater table simulated by an
                  Earth system model with a land‐ocean coupling scheme. Earth's Future, 12(8), e2024EF004479. https://doi.org/10.1029/2024EF004479
                Xu, D., Bisht, G., Zhou, T., Leung, L. R., & Pan, M. (2022). Development of land‐river two‐way hydrologic coupling for floodplain inundation in
                  the energy exascale Earth system model. Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems, 14(8), e2021MS002772. https://doi.org/10.1029/
                  2021MS002772
                Xu, Q., Shi, Y., Bamber, J., Tuo, Y., Ludwig, R., & Zhu, X. X. (2023). Physics‐aware machine learning revolutionizes scientific paradigm for
                  machine learning and process‐based hydrology. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.05227.
                Yin, Y., Le Guen, V., Dona, J., De Bézenac, E., Ayed, I., Thome, N., & Gallinari, P. (2021). Augmenting physical models with deep networks for
                  complex dynamics forecasting. Journal of Statistical Mechanics: Theory and Experiment, 2021(12), 124012. https://doi.org/10.1088/1742‐
                  5468/ac3ae5
                Zhang, Q., Zhang, L., She, D., Wang, S., Wang, G., & Zeng, S. (2021). Automatic procedure for selecting flood events and identifying flood
                  characteristics from daily streamflow data. Environmental Modelling and Software, 145, 105180. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envsoft.2021.
                  105180
                Zhang, Z., Tian, W., Lu, C., Liao, Z., & Yuan, Z. (2024). Graph neural network‐based surrogate modelling for real‐time hydraulic prediction of
                  urban drainage networks. Water Research, 263, 122142. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2024.122142
                Zhang, Z., Yan, X., Liu, P., Zhang, K., Han, R., & Wang, S. (2023). A physics‐informed convolutional neural network for the simulation and
                  prediction of two‐phase Darcy flows in heterogeneous porous media. Journal of Computational Physics, 477, 111919. https://doi.org/10.1016/
                  j.jcp.2023.111919
                Zhao, H., Hao, Y., Xu, W., & Li, C. (2024). Adaptive‐sampling physics‐informed neural network for viscoacoustic wavefield simulation. IEEE
                  Geoscience and Remote Sensing Letters, 21, 1–5. https://doi.org/10.1109/LGRS.2024.3418814
                Zhou, Z., Kuai, Y., Ge, J., van Maren, B., Wang, Z., Huang, K., et al. (2025). Modeling non‐stationary wind‐induced fluid motions with physics‐
                  informed neural networks for the shallow water equations in a polar coordinate system. Water Resources Research, 61(1), e2024WR037490.
                  https://doi.org/10.1029/2024WR037490
                Zou, Z., & Karniadakis, G. E. (2025). Multi‐head physics‐informed neural networks for learning functional priors and uncertainty quantification.
                  Journal of Computational Physics, 531, 113947. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcp.2025.113947
                Zscheischler, J., Martius, O., Westra, S., Bevacqua, E., Raymond, C., Horton, R. M., et al. (2020). A typology of compound weather and climate
                  events. Nature Reviews Earth & Environment, 1(7), 333–347. https://doi.org/10.1038/s43017‐020‐0060‐z




FENG ET AL.                                                                                                                                             27 of 27
