Quantum Chemistry in the Age of Quantum
Computing

arXiv:1812.09976v2 [quant-ph] 28 Dec 2018

Yudong Cao,†,‡ Jonathan Romero,†,‡ Jonathan P. Olson,†,‡ Matthias
Degroote,†,¶,§ Peter D. Johnson,†,‡ Mária Kieferová,k,⊥,‡ Ian D. Kivlichan,#,†
Tim Menke,#,@,4 Borja Peropadre,‡ Nicolas P. D. Sawaya,∇ Sukin Sim,†,‡ Libor
Veis,†† and Alán Aspuru-Guzik∗,†,‡,¶,§,‡‡,¶¶
†Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138,
USA
‡Zapata Computing Inc., Cambridge, MA 02139, USA
¶Department of Chemistry, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario M5G 1Z8, Canada
§Department of Computer Science, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario M5G 1Z8, Canada
kDepartment of Physics and Astronomy, Macquarie University, Sydney, NSW, 2109, Australia
⊥Institute for Quantum Computing and Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of
Waterloo, Waterloo, Ontario N2L 3G1, Canada
#Department of Physics, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA
@Research Laboratory of Electronics, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA
02139, USA
4Department of Physics, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA
∇Intel Labs, Intel Corporation, Santa Clara, CA 95054 USA
††J. Heyrovský Institute of Physical Chemistry, Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic v.v.i.,
Dolejškova 3, 18223 Prague 8, Czech Republic
‡‡Canadian Institute for Advanced Research, Toronto, Ontario M5G 1Z8, Canada
¶¶Vector Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Toronto, Ontario M5S 1M1, Canada

E-mail: alan@aspuru.com

1

Abstract
Practical challenges in simulating quantum systems on classical computers have
been widely recognized in the quantum physics and quantum chemistry communities
over the past century. Although many approximation methods have been introduced,
the complexity of quantum mechanics remains hard to appease. The advent of quantum computation brings new pathways to navigate this challenging complexity landscape. By manipulating quantum states of matter and taking advantage of their unique
features such as superposition and entanglement, quantum computers promise to efficiently deliver accurate results for many important problems in quantum chemistry
such as the electronic structure of molecules.
In the past two decades significant advances have been made in developing algorithms and physical hardware for quantum computing, heralding a revolution in
simulation of quantum systems. This article is an overview of the algorithms and results that are relevant for quantum chemistry. The intended audience is both quantum
chemists who seek to learn more about quantum computing, and quantum computing
researchers who would like to explore applications in quantum chemistry.

Table of Contents
1 Introduction and historical overview

5

2 Quantum chemistry in the age of quantum computing

11

2.1

Basics and challenges of classical quantum chemistry . . . . . . . . . . . . .

13

2.2

Classical approximation techniques and their limitations . . . . . . . . . . .

16

2.2.1

Static properties: wave functions and energy spectra . . . . . . . . .

16

2.2.2

Dynamical properties: time evolution of the wave function . . . . . .

21

Going beyond classical limitations using quantum computers . . . . . . . . .

26

2.3.1

Statics: phase estimation and variational quantum eigensolvers . . . .

29

2.3.2

Dynamics: Hamiltonian simulation and hybrid methods . . . . . . . .

31

2.3

2

2.4

Chapter 2 Glossary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3 Computational complexity

34
35

3.1

Complexity classes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

36

3.2

Complexity theory of the electronic structure problem . . . . . . . . . . . . .

39

3.3

Complexity theory in molecular vibronics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

41

3.4

Chapter 3 Glossary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

45

4 Quantum simulation algorithms for fault-tolerant quantum computers
4.1

4.2

4.3

Quantum algorithms for energy estimation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

49

4.1.1

General Hamiltonian simulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

50

4.1.2

Quantum phase estimation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

57

4.1.3

Quantum Fourier transform . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

60

Determining the ground states energies of quantum chemistry Hamiltonians

62

4.2.1

State preparation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

63

4.2.2

Hamiltonian simulation for quantum chemistry . . . . . . . . . . . . .

65

4.2.3

Measuring properties of many-body systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

70

Chapter 4 Glossary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

73

5 Quantum algorithms for noisy intermediate-scale quantum devices
5.1

5.2

46

74

Variational quantum eigensolver (VQE) algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

76

5.1.1

Ansatze for state preparation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

78

5.1.2

Energy estimation in VQE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 100

5.1.3

Optimization methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 107

5.1.4

Physical realizations of VQE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 112

5.1.5

VQE for excited states . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 113

5.1.6

Calculation of molecular properties with VQE . . . . . . . . . . . . . 116

Other hybrid quantum-classical algorithms for chemistry . . . . . . . . . . . 117
5.2.1

Variational quantum simulator . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 117
3

5.3

5.4

5.2.2

Imaginary-time variational quantum simulator . . . . . . . . . . . . . 118

5.2.3

Imaginary-time variational quantum simulator for excited states . . . 119

Non-gate-based methods for quantum chemistry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 120
5.3.1

Adiabatic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 120

5.3.2

Linear optics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 122

Chapter 5 Glossary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 125

6 Summary and outlook

127

Acknowledgements

131

A Quantum chemistry basis sets

132

B Mappings to qubits

137

B.1 Jordan-Wigner mapping . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 138
B.2 Bravyi-Kitaev mapping . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 139
C From quantum chemistry to quantum computation: example of molecular
hydrogen

141

C.1 Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 141
C.2 Defining the chemistry problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 141
C.3 Mapping the problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 143
C.4 A brief introduction to quantum computation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 145
C.5 Variational quantum eigensolver for quantum chemistry . . . . . . . . . . . . 146
C.6 Appendix Glossary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 150
References

153

4

1

Introduction and historical overview

Since the advent of electronic computers in the last century, computation has played a
fundamental role in the development of chemistry. Numerical methods for computing the
static and dynamic properties of chemicals have revolutionized chemistry as a discipline.
With the recent emergence of quantum computing, there is potential for a similarly disruptive
progress. This review provides a comprehensive picture of the current landscape of quantum
computation for chemistry to help establish a perspective for future progress.
Where can quantum computers help chemistry? As our understanding of quantum computers continues to mature, so too will the development of new methods and techniques
which can benefit chemistry. For now, at least, we are confident that quantum computers
can aid those quantum chemistry computations that require an explicit representation of the
wave function, either because of a high accuracy requirement of simulated properties or because of a high degree of entanglement in the system. In these cases, the exponential growth
of the dimension of the wave function makes manipulation and storage very inefficient on
a classical computer. Indeed, for even moderately large systems it is already intractable to
explicitly maintain the full wave function.
As both the quantum hardware and software communities continue to make rapid progress,
the immediate role of quantum computing for quantum chemistry becomes clearer. While it
seems that there will be no shortage in the demand for new classical methods, the replacement
of specific classical subroutines with quantum computations can improve the accuracy and
tractability of chemical predictions. This also brings up a new challenge: advancing quantum
algorithms for quantum chemistry requires the synergy of quantum information theory and
classical quantum chemistry techniques. While these two areas are closely related, they have
evolved following different disciplines—the former from physics and computer science, and
the latter from chemistry. In this review, our aim is to be pedagogical to scientists from each
background in order to bridge this gap and stimulate new developments. We will describe
how quantum computing methods can be used to replace or augment classical quantum
5

chemistry methods and survey an array of state-of-the-art quantum computing techniques
that may, one day, become as common-place as density functional theory.
Quantum computers are quantum systems which can be initialized, sufficiently controlled,
and measured, in order to perform a computational task 1 . There are many candidate physical
realizations of quantum computers 2 . Leading proposals include ion traps 3–7 , superconducting architectures 8–12 , quantum optics 13–16 , nitrogen vacancy centers 17–19 , nuclear magnetic
resonance 20–22 and topological qubits 23,24 . As will be done in this review, it is convenient
to abstract the description of the computation away from the particular physical implementation. However, for a concrete example in the case of ion trap quantum computing, one
approach is to use trapped Ca+ ions as qubits 25 . The quantum computation consists of
trapping the ions in an array, altering the valence-electron collective quantum state of the
ions with a series of precise laser pulses, and measuring the occupation of two Zeeman states
of the s and d orbital manifolds in each ion. Instead of referring to the energy levels of
trapped ions, we refer to the parts of an abstract quantum computer; namely, interactions
between two-level quantum systems called quantum bits or qubits. Instead of laser pulses, the
operations on an abstract quantum computer are unitary transformations. After a sequence
of unitary transformations, each qubit is measured, returning a binary outcome which is
labeled “0” or “1”.
A classical computation process can be broken down to elementary logical operations,
such as AND, on a few bits at a time. Similarly, controlled local unitary operations, called
quantum gates, can be used as elementary operations to be applied on quantum bits. The
novelty of quantum computing is derived from processes which “entangle” the qubits. Just as
atomic orbitals fail to appropriately describe molecular electronic wave functions, entangled
qubits cannot be independently assigned definite quantum states. In designing a sequence
of quantum gates (called a quantum circuit) to output the solution to a problem, entangling
quantum gates can afford shortcuts. A process for constructing a quantum circuit designed to
solve a particular problem is called a quantum algorithm. Just like a classical algorithm, the

6

performance of a quantum algorithm is characterized by the number of elementary operations
and the run time as a function of the problem instance size (e.g. the number of basis set
functions used in the calculation).
A number of quantum algorithms have been invented which stand to outperform their
classical counterparts. With regard to chemistry, these include algorithms for estimating the
ground state energies of molecular Hamiltonians and computing molecular reaction rates.
Existing quantum computers have yet to solve instances of problems which are intractable
for classical computers. However, the pace of progress bears promise for achieving this
feat 11,13,26,27 and is certain to drive the discovery of new useful quantum algorithms.
The idea of quantum computing originated in the 1980s when Manin 28 and Feynman 29
independently described a vision for using quantum mechanical systems to perform computation. Both argued that simulating quantum mechanics on classical computers requires
resources growing exponentially in the problem instance size, so that certain problems will
remain out of reach, regardless of the ingenuity of the algorithm designers. It is not true
that all quantum mechanical systems are difficult to simulate; some of them have easily
computable exact solutions and others have very clever computational shortcuts leading to
approximate solutions. However, simulation of a general quantum mechanical system has
proven to be difficult. A quantum computer, as envisioned by Feynman and Manin, can potentially circumvent the roadblock of exponential cost by being quantum mechanical itself.
During the same decade, there were also developments of abstract models of quantum
mechanical computation by Benioff 30 and Deutsch 31 , raising the still-open question of “what
are the problems for which quantum computers can have a speedup over the best-known classical algorithms?”. Motivated by this question, researchers in the 1990s developed several
quantum algorithms of major importance 32–38 . These algorithms not only solve their respective problems with provable speedup over the best known classical counterparts, but also
provide meaningful frameworks for developing subsequent quantum algorithms. We refer the
reader to the review article by Childs and van Dam 39 for a comprehensive treatment of the

7

algorithm developments prior to 2011.
This review will focus on the subset of quantum algorithms for solving problems in
chemistry. In 1996, Feynman’s vision was manifested in a theoretical proposal by Lloyd 37 ,
providing a concrete method for using quantum computers to efficiently simulate the dynamics of other quantum systems. Around the same time, Wiesner 40 and Zalka 41 also suggested
using quantum computers for simulating the dynamics of many-body systems.
The general set of techniques for using a quantum computer to simulate another quantum system falls under the name of Hamiltonian simulation. Broadly speaking, for a given
Hamiltonian H, Hamiltonian simulation is an efficient and accurate implementation of e−iHt
using elementary operations that can be executed on a quantum computer. Since these
early works of the 1990s, Hamiltonian simulation has grown to be an important subfield
of quantum computing, offering many valuable insights towards the development of further
quantum algorithms. As a prominent example, the ability to efficiently perform Hamiltonian simulation is used in conjunction with another technique known as the quantum phase
estimation algorithm (QPEA) 42 for efficiently obtaining the eigen-energies and eigenstates
of a quantum system 38 .
The first quantum algorithms suited particularly for quantum chemistry appeared as
early as the late 1990s. These include, for instance, simulating fermionic Hamiltonians 43
and the quantum algorithm for calculating thermal rate constant efficiently 44 . The opening
decade of the 21st century witnessed the first quantum algorithms for quantum chemistry
built on the insights of QPEA. For example, the quantum algorithms developed for computing molecular spectra with exponential speedup over classical computers 45,46 . The basic idea
of this work is to use Hamiltonian simulation techniques to efficiently simulate the dynamics
of a quantum molecular Hamiltonian and apply QPEA to extract the eigen-energies. Since
these initial contributions, a flurry of results have appeared in the literature which address
quantum chemistry problems of various forms. The quantum computational cost of these
algorithms has continued to be reduced 47–50 . However, practical implementation of these al-

8

gorithms is widely believed to be decades away because they require scalable, error-corrected
quantum computers. This perspective has driven researchers to ask “What are the problems we can address with near-term quantum computers of moderate size and without error
correction?”. Such devices are increasingly referred to as noisy intermediate-scale quantum
(NISQ) devices 51 .
This question has led to the new paradigm of variational quantum algorithms. The
approach has attracted substantial attention from both the theoretical and experimental
communities in quantum computing. In short, variational quantum algorithms utilize a
hybrid approach involving a quantum computer and a classical computer working in tandem.
Unlike the algorithms based on QPEA, which require the quantum computer to perform a
long sequence of operations, in the variational quantum algorithm framework the quantum
computer only needs to perform a short sequence of operations. In this way, the shortcomings
of present-day hardware are partly circumvented.
With variational quantum algorithms, each operation has parameters which can be set
by the classical computer. Hence the quantum computer can be regarded as a machine which
~ lying on a manifold determined by the classical parameters θ.
~ The
produces states |ψ(θ)i
machine then measures these states in the computational basis. This is useful, for instance,
for the estimation of the ground state energy of some Hamiltonian H 52 . For each state,
~
~ with respect to the Hamiltonian H. We then
we measure the expectation hψ(θ)|H|ψ(
θ)i
use the classical computer to tune θ~ to minimize this energy expectation. By off-loading a
portion of the computation to a classical computer, a variational quantum algorithm is a far
more practical alternative to its QPEA-based counterparts. A diverse set of experimental
groups worldwide have already implemented various variational quantum algorithms on their
physical systems 52–59 .
The quantum algorithms discussed so far fall within the standard gate model of quantum
computing, meaning they can always be described by a sequence of quantum gates which
manipulate the quantum state of a register of qubits. In parallel to the developments in

9

the gate model, there are other models of quantum computation that are also relevant for
chemistry applications. Two important models are adiabatic quantum computing (AQC)
and Boson Sampling model. The basic principle underlying AQC is the adiabatic theorem
of quantum mechanics 60 . Suppose we initialize a quantum system as the ground state of
some Hamiltonian H0 , and slowly evolve the Hamiltonian to some other Hamiltonian H1 via
a linear interpolation H(s) = (1 − s)H0 + sH1 , s ∈ [0, 1]. Assuming there is always a gap
between the ground state of H(s) and the first excited state, the end of the adiabatic evolution
of the state of the system should be close to the ground state of H1 . The approach of AQC
is to initialize a quantum system according to some Hamiltonian H0 whose ground state is
easy to prepare and verify, and choose H1 such that preparing its ground state is equivalent
to solving a hard computational problem. Extensive efforts have been made in developing
AQC and progress in the field has also been thoroughly reviewed in the literature 61 .
The AQC model has been shown to be computationally equivalent to the gate model 62 ,
meaning that algorithms written in either model can be translated to ones in the other model
without incurring prohibitive computational overhead. In contrast, the Boson Sampling
model of computation does not have this property 63 . However, it does give rise to a class of
sampling problems 64 which are hard to solve on a classical computer. This model is discussed
in more detail in Section 3.3.
Apart from quantum computation, another related intersection between computer science and quantum physics, which has become relevant to quantum chemistry, is quantum
computational complexity theory. Well-known problems in quantum chemistry have been
characterized in terms of their quantum computational complexity by taking advantage of the
rigorous machinery developed in theoretical computer science for determining the worst-case
hardness of a computational problem. Examples include finding the universal functional in
density functional theory 65 , finding the globally optimized Hartree-Fock wave function 65 , the
N -representability problem 66 , and calculating the density of states of quantum systems 67 .
These characterizations, discussed in Chapter 3, provide further motivation for the develop-

10

ment of quantum algorithms targeted at solving them. A comprehensive review 68 of relevant
results has been presented in literature, which can be a useful resource for interested readers.
The remainder of the review is organized as follows. We have provided a dependency
graph of the sections and subsection in Figure 1. In Section 2 we outline several important
computational roadblocks in quantum chemistry, describe state of the art classical methods
which grapple with these issues, and then introduce quantum algorithms which may resolve
them. In Section 3 we assess the computational hardness of classical and quantum algorithms
for chemistry from a perspective of computational complexity. Section 4 provides a more
detailed description of the state of the art quantum algorithms for quantum chemistry for
fault-tolerant quantum computation. Section 5 describes the approaches that are suitable for
calculations on present-day quantum hardware. We conclude with a summary and outlook
in Section 6. In Appendix C, we give a hands-on demonstration of how to calculate a
dissociation curve of H2 with a quantum algorithm. Due to a vast amount of notations,
symbols and nomenclatures introduced throughout the article, at the end of each chapter
(including the Appendix) we provide a glossary for terminologies used inside the respective
chapter.

2

Quantum chemistry in the age of quantum computing

A fundamental goal of quantum chemistry is to solve the time-independent, non-relativistic
Schrödinger equation for molecular systems,

Ĥmol (~r)ψ(~r, t) = Eψ(~r, t),

(1)

where Ĥmol is the molecular Hamiltonian, ψ(~r, t) is the multi-particle wave function of the
system, and E is the energy eigenvalue. In atomic units, the molecular Hamiltonian is given

11

Quantum chemistry in the age of quantum computing
2.1: Limitation of
classical computation

2.2: Classical
approximations

2.2.1: Statics

2.3: Quantum
Simulation

2.2.2: Dynamics

2.3.1: Statics

3.1: Complexity
classes

3.2: Electronic
structure theory

3.3: Molecular
vibronics

2.3.2: Dynamics

5.1: VQE

4.1: Time
evolution

5.2: Hybrid
algorithms

4.2: Hamiltonian
spectra

5.3: Non-gatebased methods

FTQC
Computational complexity

NISQ
Algorithms

Figure 1: Graphical illustration of the dependency between the subsections of this article.
Each dashed box corresponds to a section and each node on the graph corresponds to a
subsection. In general the materials are organized in a tree structure, with more details being
covered in later sections. We broadly divide the subjects into computational complexity
(Section 3) and algorithmic techniques (Section 4 and 5). In particular, the sections on
algorithms are further divided into methods suited for fault-tolerant quantum computers
(FTQC), as covered in Section 4, and noisy intermediate-scale quantum (NISQ) devices 51
covered in Section 5.

12

by
Ĥmol = −

X ∇2R~
i

i

2Mi

−

X ∇~2r

i

i

2

−

X

Zi

~
rj |
i,j |Ri − ~

+

X
i,j>i

X
Zi Zj
1
+
,
~i − R
~ j|
|~ri − ~rj |
|R

(2)

i,j>i

~ i , Mi and Zi indicate the spatial coordinates, masses and charges of the nuclei
where R
in the molecule and ~ri are the electronic coordinates. However, an exact solution quickly
becomes intractable due to the exponential growth of the size of the wave function with
the particle number 69 . This has inspired formulations of various physically-motivated wave
function approximations as well as quantum chemistry algorithms on classical computers.
This section starts from challenges as such and discusses how classical computers may fall
short in addressing some of the challenges while quantum computers are able to circumvent
the limitations. The dependency among the subsections is shown in Figure 1. In order to
facilitate the discussion, we partition the problem space into static and dynamic problems.
Static problems computing the spectrum of the Hamiltonian, most notably ground state.

2.1

Basics and challenges of classical quantum chemistry

As an approach to solve the Schrödinger equation, which is comprised of a coupled set of
differential equations, the most common strategy is to introduce a complete set of independent functions, a basis set, to describe the physical wave function of the system. Although
this does not resolve the exponential increase of parameters with system size, it allows the
balancing of computational resources with accuracy.
The full molecular Hamiltonian consists of terms associated with electrons and nuclei
as well as the interactions between them. Because the mass of a nucleus is three orders
of magnitude greater than that of an electron, a common simplifying assumption made
in quantum chemistry calculations, called the Born-Oppenheimer approximation (BOA),
treats the nuclei as stationary point charges. The problem is then transformed such that it
only involves electrons moving in a stationary potential due to the nuclei. The molecular

13

Hamiltonian is split up into a nuclear part and an electronic part
Ĥmol = Ĥnucl ( ~
R) + Ĥelec ( ~
R, ~r).

(3)

The wave function equally can be separated into a nuclear and electronic part
ψ( ~
R, ~r) = φnucl ( ~
R)χelec ( ~
R, ~r),

(4)

~ a separate electronic eigenvalue problem
such that for every nuclear configuration R,
~ ~r) = Eelec (R)χ
~ elec (R,
~ ~r)
Ĥelec χelec (R,

(5)

needs to be solved. When the BOA is valid, the Hamiltonian of interest to quantum chemistry
is
Ĥelec = −

X ∇~2r

i

i

2

−

X

Zi

i,j

~ i − ~rj |
|R

+

1
.
|~r − ~rj |
i,j>i i
X

(6)

The electronic degrees of freedom influence the nuclear motion through the appearance of
the energy in the nuclear eigenvalue equation
~ nucl (R)
~ = Eφnucl (R),
~
(Ĥnucl + Eelec (R))φ

(7)

where E is now the full molecular energy as in Equation 1.
Although in recent times there has been significant effort to treat chemistry calculations
without the BOA 70–73 , in this review we focus on treating quantum chemistry problems
within this regime. However, we note that though most of the applications are for cases
within the BOA, some of the previous formalisms have been combined with phase estimation
to treat non-BOA cases 74 . Quantum simulation in first quantization can be readily applied
to non-BOA instances as well 75,76 .
For systems of electrons, one common methodology to avoid treating the size of the full
14

many-electron wave function is density functional theory (DFT) 77,78 . All degrees of freedom
of the electronic system are integrated out, except for the density. However, the quality of
DFT depends on the chosen exchange-correlation functional. There have been several efforts
to improve DFT functionals systematically (e.g. GGA, meta-GGA, hybrid approaches) but
there is no uniform answer on which functional to use for which chemical systems. At the
same time, these more involved approaches negate some of the more attractive charateristics of regular DFT. Most functionals tend to give reasonable results around equilibrium
geometries but behave unpredictably in the regime of strong correlations or in the presence
of dispersive electron interactions, e.g. bond breaking or solvation chemistry.
Another way to avoid an exponential parameter scaling is by reducing the electron
Hamiltonian to its self-consistent field (SCF) part. This approximates the system as being comprised of electrons experiencing a mean field potential, which has to be determined
self-consistently. As a first step, an initial guess is made for the single-electron orbitals,
most frequently the atomic orbitals. After this, the influence of all electrons is averaged
into the mean-field potential and new orbitals are generated from it until convergence is
reached. The ground-state wave function is described using a single Slater determinant or
configuration. Correlation effects are thereby completely neglected, meaning computational
approximations for various physical quantities are usually of low quality. Nevertheless, the
SCF wave function is often used as a starting point to construct more sophisticated wave
function ansätze.
The exact solution to Equation 1 for an electronic system described with a fixed set of
basis set functions consists of a variationally determined superposition of all determinants
in the N -particle Fock space, also known as a full configuration interaction (FCI) expansion.
Such wave function cannot be efficiently manipulated and stored on a classical computer.
Correspondingly, quantum chemistry methods based on a wave function approach comprise a
hierarchy of models ranging from the single determinant SCF description to FCI. Each model
assumes a specific type of wave function parametrization in addition to other approximations,

15

offering different compromises between accuracy and computational cost. Some of the most
promising wave functions methods employed in quantum chemistry are described in the next
section.

2.2

Classical approximation techniques and their limitations

Quantum computation proposes methods which may overcome the challenges of quantum
chemistry described in the previous subsection. These algorithms are reviewed in Section
2.3. However, we emphasize that there are various methods and techniques in quantum
chemistry applied using classical computers that address said challenges. In this section, we
review some representative techniques and motivate the development of quantum algorithms.
2.2.1

Static properties: wave functions and energy spectra

Coupled cluster theory. Coupled cluster 79 is formulated as a compact wave function
parametrization in terms of an exponential functional of a cluster operator. The algorithm
leverages several approximations to be tractable on a classical computer. Most codes utilize
the similarity transformation formulation with the cluster operator as a pure excitation operator, taking advantage of the termination of the Baker-Campbell-Haussdorf series. This
makes the problem non-Hermitian and requires a projection onto a small subspace to solve
the cluster amplitudes, introducing a further approximation. Although this formulation of
coupled cluster is still exact in the limit of an N -body excitation operator, in practice, excitation operators are truncated. Such approximations are not guaranteed to behave well.
The breakdown of coupled cluster with only single and double excitations for molecules in
dissociation 80 is well-documented. This behavior can be generalized to any level of truncation of the excitation operator when strong correlation is exhibited by the hamiltonian 81 .
There are several approaches 82,83 that improve upon this framework by approximating higher
order cluster operators or including static correlation effects, but development of a generally
applicable method is still an active field of research.
16

While coupled cluster theory is a promising method for quantum chemistry, its nonHermitian formulation makes the obtained energy non-variational. Variationally optimized
coupled cluster 84 overcomes this problem but can only be applied to small systems 85–87 or
models with a reduced parameter space 88 on a classical computer. The introduction of a
complex conjugate excitation operator implies contractions between the operators in the bra
and the ket. The transformed hamiltonian is a full N -body operator with the number of
terms scaling factorially as N !. The problem becomes more challenging when the operators
in the exponential are not pure excitation operators. In this case the expectation values
that need to be calculated feature contraction among the cluster operators and there are
an infinite number of terms. Unitary coupled cluster 89 (in which the excitation and deexcitation operators are combined into a unitary cluster operator) and generalized coupled
cluster 90 (in which the cluster operator lacks a specific substructure) fall in this category. We
note that on a quantum computer, physical operations on qubits are often realized in terms
of unitary operators. If the cluster operator can be represented as a low-depth quantum
circuit, it is efficient to prepare a unitary coupled cluster wave function. This method of
state preparation together with a classical optimizer (see Section 5.1) enables unitary coupled
cluster for general hamiltonians.

Quantum Monte Carlo. The idea of efficiently sampling a distribution of states has
a counterpart on classical computers in Quantum Monte Carlo (QMC). It has been very
successful in performing large-scale calculations for extended systems in quantum chemistry.
QMC relies on the stochastic estimation of the energy of a trial wave function
R
ET =

d~r 3N ΨT (~r) H (~r) Ψ∗T (~r)
R
.
d~r 3N ΨT (~r) Ψ∗T (~r)

(8)

In the real-space variational Monte Carlo formulation, the position vectors are randomly
generated according to the Metropolis algorithm from the norm of the trial wave function.

17

After sufficient convergence in the energy with respect to the number of Monte Carlo samples,
the wave function parameters can be updated. This process is repeated until a desired
accuracy has been met.
More accurate QMC methods have been developed, in which more elaborate distributions
are sampled. Diffusion Monte Carlo (DMC) uses a population of walkers to stochastically
sample the position space. The composition of the population is algorithmically controlled
from generation to generation. This process depends on the knowledge of the nodes of the
exact wave function. A popular implementation of DMC fixes the nodes of the trial wave
function (fixed-node DMC) which biases the population but is shown to be more robust
and provides accurate results. Another possibility is to sample the manifold of electronic
configurations. The Auxiliary Field QMC (AFQMC) is performed as an imaginary-time
evolution of the transformed Hamiltonian in terms of the auxiliary fields. A sign problem
occurs in both DMC and AFQMC, but is mitigated by defining phase constraints on the
auxiliary fields from a trial wave function.
There is a natural connection between the underlying principles of Monte Carlo algorithms and the representation of a state on a quantum computer. Measurement outcomes
from the output of a quantum circuit are probabilistic and several algorithms have been proposed for Monte Carlo integration on a quantum computer that outperform their classical
counterparts 91 . There are certain drawbacks to the approximations in classical QMC. The
most notorious one is the sign problem that plagues most fermionic implementations. The
nature of fermions makes accurately estimating quantities using the wave function a difficult task. It has been shown that quantum computers avoid the dynamical sign problem 43
providing a more effective alternative to classical methods for quantum simulation.

Exact diagonalization. The exact diagonalization (ED) methods 79,92,93 provide the exact
answer for the wave function and energy within a certain basis set (i.e. the Full Configuration Interaction (FCI) answer). While QMC arrives at this answer through extrapolation,

18

ED achieves it in a single calculation by exact diagonalization of the Hamiltonian matrix
without stochastic error bars. This comes at the cost of storing the coefficients of all (relevant) determinants, which becomes prohibitive even for medium-sized molecules 94,95 . The
rapid increase in computing power and the development of libraries that take advantage of
distributed computing clusters have meant a steady increase in the feasible number of determinants 96–98 . Despite all these advances, FCI is still the most useful as a benchmarking
method for less-costly quantum chemical methods. Exact simulation of quantum chemistry systems is widely regarded as one of the problems that would benefit enormously from
quantum hardware 29 . The Quantum Phase Estimation (QPE) algorithm 38,99 is the natural
translation of the FCI procedure to quantum computers 45 .

Tensor network methods. Compared to the classical methods discussed so far, entanglementbased tensor product methods 100 , which have been applied to study strongly correlated
many-body physics and quantum chemistry, are closer to the formulation of gate-model
quantum computation. In the case of strongly correlated (multireference) systems where the
concept of a single dominating configuration breaks down, traditional single reference electronic structure methods are usually not applicable. On the contrary, tensor product methods 100 have proved to be efficient and accurate as multireference computational methods.
The most commonly used entanglement-based tensor product method so far is the quantum
chemistry implementation of density matrix renormalization group method (DMRG) 100–109 .
Specifically, DMRG variationally optimizes a wave function in the form of a matrix product
state (MPS) 110 :

|ΨMPS i =

X
{α}

Aα1 Aα2 · · · · · · Aαn |α1 α2 · · · αn i,

(9)

which is a one-dimensional chain of tensors. In the quantum chemistry setting, αi represents
the local Hilbert space of a single (i-th) molecular orbital (MO), i.e. αi ∈ {|0i, | ↓i, | ↑i, | ↓↑i}.
The DMRG computational complexity is governed by the size of the MPS matrices (Aαi ),
19

formally characterizing the entanglement between different MOs. Matrix product states
allow for a compact representation of one-dimensional systems and also satisfy an area law 111
in one dimension. This has led to the application of DMRG to describe ground states of
one-dimensional gapped local Hamiltonians. However, the long range Coulomb interaction
in molecules causes the entanglement among the MOs to be multidimensional as opposed
to one-dimensional. As a result, larger dimension MPS matrices (or “high bond dimension”
MPS) have to be employed in case of generic (non-one-dimensional) molecules in order to
properly capture correlations among MOs. These problems can be alleviated to some extent
by optimizing the orbital ordering along a one-dimensional lattice 112,113 as well as by basis
optimization 114 . However, these problems pose a practical limit on the applicability of tensor
network states (TNS) for quantum chemistry.
DMRG applied to quantum chemistry can generally handle large active spaces (∼ 50
MOs 115 ). It handles much larger active spaces than conventional active-space methods such
as complete active space self consistent field 116 . In certain cases it can reach the exact FCI
limit 115,117 . In case of linear (or quasi-linear) molecular systems, active spaces of a hundred
of MOs are reachable 118 . However, DMRG wave functions at a low bond dimension miss a
sizable amount of the dynamic correlation that is important in quantum chemistry. In order
to account for the missing dynamic correlation not included in the active space, several
post-DMRG methods have been developed 119–127 .
TNS 128 represent a generalization of MPS aimed at an improved representation of multidimensional entanglement. TNS include e.g. the projected entangled pair states 129 , tree
tensor network states (TTNS) 130–134 , multiscale entanglement renormalization ansatz 135 or
complete-graph TNS 136,137 . A new TTNS variant was recently presented, the three-legged
TTNS, which combines the tree-like network topology and branching tensors without physical indices 134 . It is especially appealing due to its low computational cost and network topology capable of taking into consideration the underlying entanglement of generic molecules
more efficiently.

20

The FCI wave function expansion coefficients can be converted into the MPS form by
successive applications of the singular value decomposition 110,138 . In the case of the TTNS
ansatz, which is the most general TNS without any loops, higher-order singular value decomposition is employed. Factorization of the FCI wave function into the MPS form itself
does not bring any computational savings as it results in bond dimensions of the size of the
original problem. In order to achieve polynomial scaling, bounded bond dimensions have to
be applied. Consequently the entanglement between two subsystems of the bipartite splitting governs the quantum information loss 139 and accuracy of the ansatz. It must be noted
that low bond dimension MPS are not candidates for quantum speedup as slightly entangled
quantum computations may be efficiently simulated on a classical computer using the MPS
formalism 138 .
2.2.2

Dynamical properties: time evolution of the wave function

Zero-temperature ground-state quantum chemistry covers only a restricted set of the chemistry in nature. Many processes occur at finite temperature where the system is propagated
in time and described by the time-dependent Schrödinger equation

i

∂
Ψ (~r, t) = HΨ (~r, t) .
∂t

(10)

When the Hamiltonian is time-independent, this equation is formally solved by

Ψ (~r, t) = exp (−iHt) Ψ (~r, 0) .

(11)

The expansion of this equation in terms of eigenvectors ψj (~r) of the time-independent Hamiltonian
Ψ (~r, t) =

X

cj exp (−iEj t) ψj (~r)

j

21

(12)

reveals the difficulty of the problem: exact time evolution requires knowledge of the full spectrum of the Hamiltonian and the expansion of the initial state in terms of the eigenvectors.
This is only feasible for very small systems.
Several levels of approximations are often applied to approach the problem. Here we
review two broad categories of methods. Molecular dynamics avoids the explicit wave function propagation by treating the nuclei as classical charged particles and only solving for
the electrostatic field from electron density with fixed nuclei positions. Other methods avoid
maintaining the full wave function with similar strategies as those described in Section 2.2.1,
with an additional consideration of time dependence.

Molecular dynamics (MD). When studying the dynamics of large chemical systems (approximately hundreds of atoms), one often is interested in properties for which no quantum
effects are necessary. It is sufficient to use classical MD methods which simulate the problem using an effective force field and Newtonian mechanics 140 . MD is often applied to
problems such as diffusion rates, reaction rates, conformal changes, infrared spectra, and
binding energies, to study processes such as protein folding, gas absorption in porous materials, stress-induced material deformation, and electrolyte solvation, among many others.
Because these quantities can often be calculated to desired accuracy by treating each atom
as a classical Newtonian particle, MD avoids the construction of a Hilbert space under time
evolution.
In order to advance one time step in a Newtonian simulation, the forces on the particles
need to be approximated. This is achieved in MD by introducing a force field that acts
on the atoms without explicitly considering electronic degrees of freedom. A force field
comprises of a set of terms that are parametrized by electronic structure calculations or
experiment. The dynamics of the system are propagated using algorithms such as Euler or
Verlet integration, after which one can obtain an intuitive qualitative understanding of the
dynamics of a process (e.g. protein-ligand docking), or calculate quantitative results from

22

correlation functions (such as spectra or diffusion constants). If the primary interest is in
finding low-energy states (which is the case in finding the lowest-energy molecular crystal
conformation or in protein-ligand docking), then the dynamics are less relevant, and one of
many optimization methods is used to find the ground state of the system. We note that one
way to improve accuracy is to use ab initio electronic structure methods in conjunction with
MD methods as a way to consider dynamics for the whole system. Such methods include
Born-Oppenheimer MD 141 and Carr-Parinello MD 142 .
There are many chemical systems for which nuclear quantum effects must be considered,
even if the electronic degrees of freedom can be safely absorbed into the force field. Such
effects include nuclear tunneling and zero-point vibrational energy, which are not captured
by Newtonian mechanics. Nuclear quantum effects are needed for simulating condensed
matter systems containing low-temperature helium and hydrogen 143 , as well as for obtaining
high accuracy simulations of hydrogen-containing room-temperature systems such as liquid
water 144 . A variety of flavors of path integral methods 145 have been developed to model
nuclear quantum effects, including path-integral MD 146 , centroid MD 147 , and ring-polymer
MD 148 . Conceptually, these methods operate by discretizing an atom into many “beads”
that represent a state of the system in the path-integral. While these methods include
some quantum effects listed above, they avoid using a Hilbert space, which limits their
computational cost to that of classical MD methods.
It is important to note that, even though MD has opened a whole field of research that
was previously inaccessible, the method has limitations that are hard to overcome without
fundamentally altering the procedure. The most severe problem is the limited amount of
time propagation that MD currently supports. Some processes in biochemistry such as
conformational transition in hemoglobin occur on a time scale that is many times the current
limit of MD calculations 149 .

Quantum time evolution. Most of the methods in section 2.2.1 can be adapted to perform

23

time evolution over which the quantum character is preserved at all steps. One of the strategies for time propagation is directly propagating the solution of the Schrödinger equation,
i.e. updating an explicit wave function or density matrix at each time step. This quickly
becomes memory intensive and requires a method to approximate the matrix exponential of
the Hamiltonian 150 .
Moler and Loan 151 categorized the many methods for approximating the operation of a
matrix exponential. The Taylor expansion, Padé approximant, and Chebyshev approximant
are series methods based on powers of the Hamiltonian 150,151 to approximate the evolution
operator. They are accurate for small matrices but prohibitively expensive for larger systems. Standard ordinary differential equation (ODE) solvers such as Runge-Kutta are a
common workhorse for time propagation of classical equations. They can be adapted to
perform quantum propagation 150,152 , although they are not the most computationally efficient choice for a given accuracy. Polynomial methods form another algorithmic category.
They rely on the exact expression of high-order matrix powers as lower-order polynomials
of the Hamiltonian 153 . The bottleneck for those methods is calculating the characteristic
polynomial, which is expensive for large matrices. Note that in practice these methods are
often combined—for instance, after performing the Lanczos decomposition one may use the
Padé approximant on the resulting smaller approximate matrix 154 . For all of these methods,
the propagation or matrix exponentiation algorithm is chosen based on desired accuracy, the
size of the system, ease of implementation, and properties of the matrix such as its condition
number.
Matrix decomposition methods try to approximate the operator exponential of the Hamiltonian directly. The prototypical example of this is the decomposition of the exponential as
eA = SeV S −1 , where A = SV S −1 and V is diagonal. This approach requires far fewer matrixmatrix operations than the naive implementation. Improved stability and efficiency are often
observed by rewriting the exponential in terms of triangular (e.g. Schur) or block-diagonal
matrix decompositions 155 . There are also splitting methods which apply an approximation

24

that can be used if the Hamiltonian is expressible as a sum of matrices, and where each term
of the sum can be simulated by a known efficient method. This is the same procedure used
in the Trotter-Suzuki method, as well as the split-operator method for applying the kinetic
and potential energy terms separately 156 . Finally, the Krylov subspace methods (e.g. the
Lanczos method for Hermitian matrices) make it possible to approximate e−iH v for a given
vector v, by solely performing matrix-vector multiplications 154,157 . This is efficient for large
matrices.
One of the most cost effective ways to obtain time-dependent properties without explicitly doing time propagation is the first-order perturbation approach or linear response
theory. Even though the original formulation of Time-Dependent DFT 158 does not require
the time-dependent part of the Hamiltonian to be small, it has mostly been applied using this
assumption 159–161 . In the same spirit, a linear-response approximation to DMRG 162,163 and
coupled cluster 164–166 allow for the calculation of dynamical properties with high-level quantum chemistry methods. Linear response is the first-order expansion of a time-dependent
property and perturbation theory falls short of describing the full time dependence. Ideally
we would like to be able to truly propagate quantum wave functions for an arbitrary amount
of time.
The time-dependent variational principle (TDVP) 167–169 has enabled time-dependent
variational Monte Carlo calculations for bosons 170 and strongly correlated fermions 171 . Although the TDVP has also found its application in DMRG 172 , the most popular algorithm
for time evolution with a DMRG-style ansatz is called time-evolving block decimation 173 .
This method relies on a Trotterization of the time-evolution and the DMRG truncation of
the Hilbert space after every time-step. A more thorough review of time evolution algorithms
related to DMRG can be found in Schollwöck 174 . Despite these impressive efforts to formulate analogous time-dependent methods, the shortcomings of the tensor-based methods they
are based on are equally present and even aggravated. After longer time evolution, errors
due to the inherent approximations accumulate and lead to loss of accuracy and a rapidly

25

growing bond dimension.
Simulating dynamical behavior around conical intersections is an important topic in theoretical chemistry, relevant for studying reaction mechanisms and in photochemistry, including
photocatalysis and the interpretation of spectroscopic results. Conical intersections occur
when two electronic states, e.g. the ground state and first excited state of a molecule, intersect
at a point in nuclear coordinate space. Close to these points, the Born-Oppenheimer approximation breaks down, resulting in entanglement between electronic and nuclear degrees
of freedom. This means that the the full quantum state is no longer well-approximated with
a product state, necessitating methods that allow for multireference character in the wave
function, of which we mention three popular methods here. The multiconfiguration timedependent Hartree (MCTDH) algorithm 175 models all relevant quantum degrees of freedom,
propagating superpositions of product states. Evolution of a wave packet over longer time
periods in MCTDH requires considerable computer resources and therefore larger systems
are out of the scope of current capabilities. The matching-pursuit/split-operator Fouriertransform 176 and the more classical multiple spawning method 177 use careful metrics to
continually update the basis set in which the system is propagated to ensure efficient simulation. Recent reviews have been published on these and other algorithms for studying
nonadiabatic dynamics and conical intersections 178,179 .

2.3

Going beyond classical limitations using quantum computers

All of the classical techniques introduced in the previous section are designed to avoid two
features in a computation. Namely, these are explicitly maintaining the full many-body
wave function |ψi and propagating the wave function in time by general matrix-vector multiplication e−iHt |ψi. However, as we will discuss in this section, quantum computers allow
for efficient implementation of these two features. For the former, i.e. state representation,
there are quantum states for which no known efficient classical representation exists, but
that can be prepared on a quantum computer. The quantum computer thus has access
26

to a richer state space for the ground-state search for certain systems. For the latter feature, time evolution, a long line of inquiry in quantum computing that spans more than
two decades has led to a refined set of quantum algorithms for efficiently simulating time
evolution under both time-independent and time-dependent Hamiltonians. These two features of a quantum computer allow for algorithm design techniques that are quite different
from the classical algorithms for simulating quantum systems. Both state preparation and
Hamiltonian evolution are instrumental to the techniques we review in this section.
In addition to distinguishing between static and dynamic problems as in the previous
section, we also make a distinction between NISQ devices and fault-tolerant quantum computing (FTQC) devices. The first are available at present or are using technologies that
will be available in the near-term, while the latter require much more research and are a
much longer-term prospect. The main difference between NISQ and FTQC devices concerns
decoherence due to the environmental noise and whether it sets an upper limit on the time
duration of a quantum computation. In this sense, NISQ devices are sensitive to sources
of noise and error (hence the term “noisy” in NISQ) while FTQC devices can, in principle,
carry out coherent quantum computation for an arbitrary amount of time.
Many well-known quantum algorithms that have become standard examples of quantum
speedups over classical algorithms, such as Shor’s quantum factorization algorithm, quantum
search algorithm by Grover and quantum phase estimation (which we will review here), in
fact assume the availability of FTQC devices in order to deliver the promised quantum
advantage. This does not a priori exclude the possibility of quantum advantage on NISQ
devices. In fact, there are promising ideas which may bring tangible results for quantum
chemistry on near-term devices.
Before discussing any quantum simulation algorithms, we would like to start with how
wave functions of quantum systems can be represented on a quantum computer. The basic
building blocks of quantum computation are controllable two-level systems called qubits. If
we denote the two levels of a qubit as |0i and |1i, the wave function of an n-qubit quantum
27

computer can be expressed as a superposition of 2n computational basis states:

|ψi =

X
i1 ,i2 ,··· ,in ∈{0,1}

ai1 i2 ···in |i1 i ⊗ |i2 i ⊗ · · · ⊗ |in i.

(13)

For describing a computational basis state the Kronecker product symbol ⊗ is commonly
dropped for simplicity in notation. For example, we will use |110i for representing the 3-qubit
state |1i ⊗ |1i ⊗ |0i. Early proposals 40,41 for representing wave functions of quantum systems
consider a real-space representation where the spatial wave function ψ(x) is discretized into
P
grid points i ψi |ii with each |ii being a computational basis state. Similar representations
have been improved in later studies applying them to simulation of quantum dynamics in
real space 75,76 . An alternative representation considers the second-quantized picture where
each computational basis state |i1 i2 · · · in i corresponds to a Slater determinant in the Fock
space. Each ij = 1 if the spin-orbital j is occupied and 0 otherwise. This representation
underlies the majority of quantum algorithms for quantum chemistry on both NISQ and
FTQC devices. One of the appealing features of this approach is that it allows one to
transform the molecular Hamiltonian into a standard second-quantized form

H2q =

X

hpq a†p aq +

X

hpqrs a†p a†q ar as

(14)

p,q,r,s

p,q

where a†i and ai are raising and lowering operators acting on the i-th basis function. Here the
coefficients hpq and hpqrs are one-electron and two-electron integrals which can be efficiently
computed classically for many choices of basis functions. The fermionic operators obey anticommutation relations {ai , a†j } = ai a†j + a†j ai = δij and {ai , aj } = {a†i , a†j } = 0. One can
transform the Hamiltonian expressed in terms of fermionic operators into a more natural
form for quantum simulation of electronic structure on a quantum computer. The basic
idea is to replace each fermionic operator with a tensor product of Pauli matrices X =



0 −i
1 0
0 1 , Y =
,
Z
=
. While there are several methods for accomplishing this
0
−1
1 0
i 0

28

transform 180,181 , all result in a Hamiltonian that is a linear combination of tensor products

of matrices {I, X, Y, Z} with I = 10 01 in such a way that preserves the fermionic anticommutation relations. In general we can write such Hamiltonian as a k-local Hamiltonian

Hk−local =

X
i

ci σi,1 σi,2 · · · σi,k .

(15)

Here “k-local” means that each term in the Hamiltonian acts non-trivially on at most k
qubits. In Equation 15, the notation σi,j means the j-th operator in the i-th term of the
Hamiltonian. Each σi,j is a Pauli operator acting on one qubit. For a detailed illustration of
mapping from a molecular Hamiltonian to a k-local Hamiltonian representation in the Fock
space, the reader is encouraged to refer to Appendix C for an example using a hydrogen
molecule.
The organization of this section is similar to the previous section where the problem space
is partitioned into static and dynamic problems. In addition, for each category we discuss
quantum techniques devised for both NISQ and FTQC devices. The goal is to introduce
some representative ideas in the space, leaving more detailed discussions to Sections 4, 5 and
Appendix C.
2.3.1

Statics: phase estimation and variational quantum eigensolvers

The idea of quantum phase estimation can be traced back to early works on quantum mechanics by von Neumann 182 inquiring the nature of quantum measurements. Contemporary
discussions on phase estimation would commonly place its origin at the work of Kitaev
et al. 42 . However, textbooks 1 on quantum computing typically use another version of phase
estimation which differs from Kitaev’s version. The basic idea stems from the fact that for a
given unitary operator U , its eigenvalues take the form of a phase λj = eiϕj . We assume that
U has an efficient implementation on a quantum computer. That is, if U acts on n qubits,
there is a polynomial-length sequence of elementary operations that one can perform on a

29

quantum computer which equals or well approximates U . For an eigenstate |ψj i, the phase
estimation 1 algorithm transforms the state on a quantum computer into

|ψj i|0i 7→ |ψj i|ϕ̃j i,

(16)

where |ϕ̃j i is a state that encodes an approximation of the phase ϕj /(2π). The approximation
error comes from the attempt to capture the value of ϕj , which is a continuous variable, with
a finite qubit register and hence a finite-dimensional quantum system. By measuring the
state |ϕ̃j i one could extract the phase ϕi up to the precision allowed by the qubit register.
Phase estimation is an algorithmic framework that encapsulates a broad set of quantum
algorithms. For example, Shor’s algorithm for integer factorization 32 and amplitude estimation 183 both can be cast as a form of phase estimation for specific construction of unitary
operators U . Most relevant to this review, is the use of phase estimation for extracting the
eigenspectrum of a Hamiltonian H. This corresponds to the special case where U = e−iHt .
Efficient implementation of e−iHt is the subject of Hamiltonian simulation which merits a
separate discussion in Section 2.3.2. It should be noted that in the case where the objective
is a specific eigenstate of the Hamiltonian such as the ground state |ψ0 i, an appropriate
initial state |φ0 i, reasonably close to |ψ0 i is needed. To see this, consider a general state
P
P
|φi = j βj |ψj i. Applying phase estimation on the initial state |φi|0i yields j βj |ψj i|ϕ̃j i.
Upon measurement of the second qubit register, one would like to maximize the chance of
obtaining |ϕ˜0 i, which is dictated by |β0 |2 . In order to obtain the ground state energy in a
time duration that scales polynomially in the number of qubits n acted on by the Hamiltonian H, we require that |β0 |2 be at least as large as an inverse polynomial in n. Several
methods of state preparation on a quantum computer have been discussed in the literature
and we review them in detail in Section 4.2.1.
For quantum chemistry applications, there are well motivated methods for preparing initial wave functions based on efficiently computable ansatzes. In addition, the Hamiltonians

30

for molecular electronic structure problems are also well studied in the context of implementing time evolution U = e−iHt . Both ingredients give hope that quantum computers
can take advantage of quantum phase estimation to efficiently compute the spectrum of
quantum systems to accuracy comparable to FCI. However, an important technical point is
that the sequences of operations (or quantum circuits, see Section 4.1.3) yielded from phase
estimation are often too deep to be feasible on today’s NISQ devices 51 . Instead they require
fault-tolerant quantum computers which can in principle perform quantum computation indefinitely. However, there are significant technical challenges which need to be met before
fault-tolerance can be achieved. For NISQ devices, the recently proposed paradigm of hybrid
quantum-classical algorithm is a more practical framework for developing heuristics to solve
the same problems of eigenstates and energy levels.
A salient feature of hybrid quantum-classical algorithms is that much of the computational burden is offloaded to a classical computer. The quantum computer is only used for
its ability to prepare entangled states that are otherwise hard to represent classically and to
make measurements with respect to the states. Specifically, the setting is that the quantum
~ parametrized by classical parameters θ.
~ One then
computer can prepare a set of states |ψ(θ)i
makes measurement with respect to the state and the classical computer updates the parameter setting to θ~0 and feeds it back into the state preparation on the quantum device. By
iterating between classical and quantum processors, the hybrid algorithm eventually trains
the quantum computer to prepare the state that is desired for the problem. An important
class of hybrid quantum-classical algorithms that are useful for solving static problems in
quantum chemistry is the variational quantum eigensolver (VQE), which will be discussed
in greater detail in Section 5.1.
2.3.2

Dynamics: Hamiltonian simulation and hybrid methods

Many quantum chemistry problems concern the time evolution of a quantum state under a
Hamiltonian H. Propagating an initial wave function |ψ0 i in time by calculating |ψ(t)i =
31

e−iHt |ψ0 i is in general hard on a classical computer. As we have alluded to in Section 2.2,
classically tractable cases include restricted settings where
1. the system is small enough for the Hamiltonian to be treatable with explicit methods;
2. the time step t is small, for which e−iHt ≈ I −iHt. This yields a linear response theory;
3. efficient approximation of the wave function is possible using, for instance, tensor
networks, as in t-DMRG, or more recently neural networks 184 ;
4. the dynamical sign problem can be effectively suppressed 185 .
Quantum computation circumvents the main issues encountered in classical methods by
maintaining a highly entangled quantum state which may not admit efficient classical description, enabling a fundamentally different approach to realizing the unitary evolution and
in doing so avoids the dynamical sign problem 43 .
On a (fault-tolerant) quantum computer, there are efficient methods for implementing
an approximation of e−iHt for arbitrary t and a broad class of Hamiltonians H. Early works
on Hamiltonian simulation 37,45,186 assume that H can be written as a sum of local terms
P
H =
j Hj where each Hj acts on a subsystem. By application of the Trotter-Suzuki
formula, the problem becomes how to implement each e−iHj t individually on a quantum
computer. For molecular electronic structure problems the recipes for such implementations
have been explicitly specified 186 . Using such recipes, implementing e−iHt for an n-qubit
Hamiltonian takes time polynomial in n on a quantum computer, while a classical computer
takes time at least ∼ 2n . In recent years there has been an extensive line of inquiry 47–50
in estimating and improving Hamiltonian simulation techniques in the context of phase
estimation for quantum chemistry applications.
An alternative setting of Hamiltonian simulation 187,188 considers an “oracle model” where
the Hamiltonian is assumed to be a sparse matrix and its elements are provided by a black
box (or oracle) such that when queried with the row number i and the index j (namely 1st ,

32

2nd etc.), the black box returns the j th non-zero element of the matrix. It is also assumed that
one can make queries to the oracle in superposition and obtain answers in superposition. The
total cost of the algorithm is then taken to be either the number of total queries, or the sum
of total queries and the total number of elementary operations performed on a quantum computer. Some of the recently developed paradigms for Hamiltonian simulation 187–190 achieve
exponential improvements in precision compared with their predecessors 187,188 . They have
also been applied to quantum chemistry 191,192 yielding a similar exponential improvement.
We will expand on the details in Section 4.1.
Naturally, any discussion of realizing the operation e−iHt is restricted to simulating time
evolution of closed, time-independent systems. More generally, algorithms for simulating
open quantum systems have also been explored 193–195 . These algorithms focus on the Hamiltonian and Lindblad operators being sparse and given by oracles (black-boxes). For timedependent Hamiltonians, early works 196 focus on variants of Trotter-Suzuki formula, which
are subsequently improved with black-box models 188 . Recently, simulation techniques in
the interaction picture 197 have been proposed. A similar technique has also been applied
in quantum chemistry 198 to produce the first quantum simulation algorithm of cost scaling
sublinearly in the number of basis functions. In parallel with previous methods for simulating
time-independent Hamiltonians 188 yielding near-optimal cost scaling, techniques for simulating time-dependent Hamiltonians using Dyson series 199 have also been recently proposed,
with scaling matching the time-independent case 188 .
All of the quantum algorithms mentioned in this subsection rely on the possibility of
fault-tolerant quantum computers in order to outperform any of their classical counterparts.
However, the prospect of physical fault-tolerant devices will most likely require decades of
experimental progress. This prospect has led researchers to investigate what quantum dynamics one can simulate with the quantum devices that we have today. Indeed, there are
already proposals 200 for NISQ algorithms based on variational principles 201,202 . In these
~ is generated by a low depth circuit with classical paramemethods, a quantum state |ψ(θ)i
33

ters ~θ. The time evolution of an initial state |ψ(θ~0 )i then translates to updating the classical
parameters iteratively as the simulation progresses. More details on using variational principles for both real and imaginary time propagation will be discussed in Section 5.2.

2.4

Chapter 2 Glossary

H, Hi

Hamiltonian and terms in the Hamiltonian, respectively

cn , β j

Probability amplitudes

t

Time

|ψi, ψ, φ

Quantum states

A, S, V

Arbitrary matrix, its similarity transform and its diagonalized form

~ θ~0
θ,

Variational parameters

a, a†

Fermion annihilation and creation operators

~r

Electron coordinate position vector

~
R

Nuclear coordinate position vector

hpq , hpqrs

One and two body Hamiltonian elements

X, Y , Z, I

Pauli matrices and identity

E

Energy

σi,j

i-th Pauli operator acting on the j-th qubit

N

Particle number

U

Unitary operator

A

Tensor

n

Number of qubits

E j , ψj

Eigenvalue and eigenvector of Hamiltonian

λj , ϕj

Complex eigenvalue of a unitary and its phase

QPEA

Quantum phase estimation algorithm

VQA

Variational quantum algorithm

AQC

Adiabatic quantum computing
34

DFT

Density functional theory

GGA, meta-GGA

Generalized gradient approximation

SCF

Self-consistent field

FCI

Full configuration interaction

QMC

Quantum Monte Carlo

DMC

Diffusion Monte Carlo

AFQMC

Auxiliary field quantum Monte Carlo

ED

Exact diagonalization

QPE

Quantum phase estimation

DMRG

Density matrix renormalization group

QC-DMRG

Quantum chemistry density matrix renormalization group

MPS

Matrix product states

MO

Molecular orbital

TNS

Tensor network state

TTNS

Tree tensor network states

MD

Molecular dynamics

ODE

Ordinary differential equation

TDVP

Time-dependent variational principle

MCTDH

Multiconfiguration time-dependent hartree

NISQ

Noisy intermediate-scale quantum

FTQC

Fault-tolerant quantum computing

VQE

Variational quantum eigensolver

3

Computational complexity

There are many examples of elusive problems in quantum physics or quantum chemistry
that seem to defy efficient solutions despite decades of effort. These include the 3D Ising

35

problem, Hubbard models, and finding the universal functional in density functional theory.
In the face of these hard open problems, one may ask the question of why these problems
remain unanswered. Is it a lack of human ingenuity and understanding, or a fundamental
difficulty that is inherent to these problems? Being able to answer this question not only
provides theoretical insights on the problems themselves, but could also provide guidance for
research efforts to choose the most fruitful direction toward a solution. To make progress, one
may turn to the theory of computational complexity, which seeks to rigorously characterize
the computational hardness of various problems 68 . In order to help capture the inherent
hardness of solving various families of problems, the theoretical computer science community
has developed the concept of complexity classes.
It is important to note that the computational complexity of a given problem refers
to its worst-case hardness, and does not always inform us of how difficult a problem is
to solve in practice. A pertinent example is that of determining the optimal Hartree-Fock
approximation of a molecular eigenstate. This problem is known to have the same complexity
(NP-completeness) as many infamously hard problems. Yet, there are heuristic methods
which regularly solve the Hartree-Fock problem in practice. Complexity classes account for
the worst-case instances of a problem, even if these instances may rarely occur in practice.
The utility of defining complexity classes, then, is that they provide a reality check when
developing new methods for solving previously-classified problems.
The remainder of the section is organized as follows (see also Figure 1): we start with
Section 3.1, where we establish the basic notions in the theory of computational complexity.
Building on these definitions, Sections 3.2 and 3.3 discuss results related to problems of
electronic structure and molecular vibronic structure respectively.

3.1

Complexity classes

This section intends to provide an intuitive introduction into the notion of complexity classes.
Consider the example of finding the ground states of a family of Hamiltonians of various
36

system sizes. Formally, this is an example of a problem, while finding the ground state of a
particular Hamiltonian within this family is an example of a problem instance. Problems and
problem instances are two important primitives in the study of computational complexity
classes.
From the computational viewpoint, an algorithm is efficient for a problem if for any
problem instance of size n, it can solve the instance in a time that is less than some polynomial
function of n. Here the “size” is a parameter of the problem that characterizes how much
information is needed to specify the problem completely (e.g. basis set size in the ground
state search of a molecular Hamiltonian, number of grid points in a real space calculation).
This allows us to rigorously characterize how hard it is to solve a computational problem.
The simplest category of complexity classes involve decision problems, which are problems
for which the answer is binary (“yes” or “no”). If a decision problem has an efficient algorithm
then it is in complexity class P, meaning deterministic polynomial time. If a decision problem
is such that, when provided a candidate solution, one can efficiently check whether the
candidate is correct, then the problem is in the complexity class NP, which stands for nondeterministic polynomial time. It is unknown whether or not a problem being efficient to
check implies that it is efficient to solve. This question is captured by the famous P vs NP
conjecture 203 that is still unsolved. Another important complexity class is known as NPhard. The qualification “hard” is used to indicate that a problem is at least as hard as any
problem in that class. Formally, a problem is said to be NP-hard if an algorithm for solving
such problems can be efficiently translated into an algorithm for solving any problem in NP.
If a problem is both NP-hard and in NP, it is said to be NP-complete. Roughly speaking, a
problem being NP-complete is strong evidence that there does not exist a provably efficient
algorithm to solve it, be it of classical or quantum nature 204 .
In addition to decision problems, another important category of problem are counting
problems. While a decision problem can be formulated as “Does a solution exist?”, a counting
problem can be formulated as “How many solutions exist?”. From the class of problems

37

in NP derives a complexity class of counting problems known as #P (“Sharp-P”). The
complexity class #P is roughly defined as the set of problems which ask to count the number
of solutions to problem instances, where candidate solutions can be efficiently checked. There
is a sense in which problems in #P are at least as hard as the corresponding problems in
NP. If one had a way to compute the number of solutions to a problem, then one could
determine whether or not a solution exists.

Figure 2: Known relationship between the complexity classes discussed in this section. Note
that some classes reside entirely inside other classes, which naturally defines a difficulty
hierarchy. Note that P# P and the polynomial hierarchy PH are powerful complexity classes
that relate to some of the major developments in quantum complexity theory.
The complexity classes P, NP, and #P assume that the underlying computation is classical. In other words, P is the class of problems efficiently solvable on a classical computer,
NP is the class of problems whose solutions are efficiently checkable on a classical computer,
and #P is the class of problems which count the number of solutions for problems whose
solutions are efficiently checkable on a classical computer. The advent of quantum computing has also led to research on the quantum generalizations of these complexity classes. In
particular the complexity class BQP, short for Bounded-error Quantum Polynomial-time,
refers to the set of problems that can be efficiently solved on a quantum computer. QMA,
38

short for Quantum Merlin-Arthur, refers to the set of problems such that when presented a
candidate solution as a quantum state, one can use a quantum computer to efficiently verify
the solution. Drawing a parallel from the discussion above, if a problem is QMA-complete
then it is unlikely that there is an efficient solution even on a quantum computer. While
the quantum analog of #P, #BQP, has been defined and has been shown to contain important physical problems, it turns out to be of equal complexity to #P 67 . Although the
exact relationships between the complexity classes remain largely open, certain containment
relationships have already been proven (Figure 2).
At the intersection between theoretical computer science and condensed matter physics
has emerged a research program that has recently come under the name Quantum Hamiltonian Complexity 205,206 . Quantum Hamiltonian complexity seeks to gain insights on some
of the most challenging open problems in quantum physics and chemistry. Most notably,
it has been shown that finding the ground state energy of many simple locally interacting systems is QMA-complete 207,208 . The three example open problems we mentioned in
the opening of this section all have their own computational complexity characterizations:
the 3D Ising model is NP-complete 209 , finding the ground state of Bose-Hubbard model is
QMA-complete 210 and finding the universal functional in density functional theory is also
QMA-complete 65 . Finally we note that a comprehensive list 211 of QMA-complete problems
have been compiled and the reader may use it for further exploration.

3.2

Complexity theory of the electronic structure problem

The exponential complexity in handling the exact wave function is well known to be a major
obstacle in solving many important problems in quantum chemistry such as electronic structure calculations. In Section 2.1 we elaborated on classical methods for circumventing the
exponential complexity. Here we review rigorous results for characterizing computational
hardness of various problems in electronic structure. Naturally, the QMA-completeness
results for the ground state of locally-interacting systems mentioned before leads to specu39

lations about potential consequences for electronic structure 212 . Indeed, other than finding
the universal functional for density functional theory 65 , the problem of checking whether
a given set of two-electron reduced density matrices (2RDM) is consistent with a single
many-electron wave function, known as the N -representability problem, has also been proven
QMA-complete 66 . Solving the Hartree-Fock (HF) method, which intends to find a single
Slater determinant that best approximates the true wave function, has been shown to be
NP-complete 65 . The NP-completeness has also been proven to persist even if one restricts
to translationally invariant systems 213 .
Although it is unlikely that one can find general and provably effective (quantum or
classical) algorithms for QMA-complete or NP-complete problems, in practice, there are
heuristic methods that have gained some empirical success. For example in the case of
Hartree-Fock, the self-consistent field iteration serves as a local search algorithm which can
converge to a local optimum. By chance, this can also be the global optimum, but proving
that it is, or systematically finding the global minimum, is NP-complete. Although the
N -representability problem is QMA-complete, heuristic methods building on constrained
optimization of 2RDMs can nonetheless produce useful results in many cases 214,215 . On
quantum computers, the strategies for navigating the computational hardness of finding the
eigenstates and eigenenergies revolve around exploiting the ability to maintain full wave
functions encoded as multi-qubit entangled states. For example, the variational quantum
eigensolver may start by preparing a physically motivated wave function ansatz that is
otherwise hard to prepare classically, such as unitary coupled cluster 216 . Another cause for
optimism in light of the QMA-completeness of the ground state problem for general local
Hamiltonians is that the Hamiltonians occurring in quantum chemistry problems are more
restricted than the general setting considered in the computational complexity results 68 .
Aside from the problems that are provably hard in the worst case, there are problems
that can be efficiently solved on a quantum computer. Many such problems are related to
the time evolution of a wave function under a Hamiltonian. In Section 2.3.2 we mentioned

40

some representative techniques for realizing unitary time evolution on a quantum computer.
Each polynomial-time quantum algorithm is by itself a proof that the corresponding problem
addressed by the algorithm is in BQP. In contrast to the QMA-completeness of evaluating the universal functional in density functional theory 65 , the problem of evaluating the
time-dependent effective Kohn-Sham potential can be efficiently addressed on a quantum
computer 217 and is therefore in BQP. We categorize the problems and their respective computational complexity classes in Table 2.
Table 2: Representative problems in quantum physics and quantum chemistry and their
computational complexity classes.
BQP
Simulating unitary time evolution 75
Approximating Kohn-Sham potential
in TDDFT 217

NP-complete
Ground state of 3D Ising models 209
Hartree-Fock on general quantum
systems 65

QMA-complete
N -representability 66
Universal
DFT 65

functional

in

Hartree-Fock on translationally Bose-Hubbard model 210
invariant systems 213

3.3

Complexity theory in molecular vibronics

The motivation for solving chemical problems on a quantum computer often stems from the
ability of the computer to natively simulate some or all of the dynamics of the chemical
system directly on a quantum device. An appealing consequence of such native simulation is
that the computing device often does not need to use a great deal of resources encoding the
appropriate quantum states onto the hardware, thereby reducing the resource overhead significantly. While there are as yet no quantum computer systems whose underlying physical
platform is naturally fermionic, the field of linear optical quantum computing has seen substantial progress toward performing quantum information processing with photons, which
are bosonic systems. Given the resource-limited nascent state of gate-model quantum computing, algorithms that look toward solving bosonic chemical problems may be particularly
valuable for showing early demonstrations of post-classical computing and to making an
impact to chemistry in the immediate future.
41

In particular, the optical boson sampling model is one such proposal for a near-term
application. The model consists of a series of optical modes, or pathways, where light is
allowed to propagate. Along these modes are passive linear-optics devices, such as beamsplitters and phase shifters, which allow the exchange of photons to take place between two
modes. This generates so-called number-mode entanglement in a bosonic Fock space, much
like the fermionic Fock space corresponding to the occupation number basis, which conserves
the total number of photons (note that a major difference between bosonic and fermionic
Fock spaces is the ability for bosonic modes to be occupied by any number of photons, as
opposed to spin-orbitals which have at most a single fermion). It is natural, then, to consider chemical systems which are described by bosonic processes as candidates for a quantum
algorithm on this platform.
One particular process is molecular vibronic spectroscopy, which considers the vibrational
transitions between two electronic states of a molecule. This process is fully characterized by
the Franck-Condon profile (FCP) 218 , which describes the spectra of vibronic modes in the
harmonic regime. Recall that vibrational modes can be described by excitations of phonons,
which are virtual bosonic particles. There are a number of important molecular properties that depend on the vibrational modes of a molecule, particularly those related to its
interaction with light. Emission, absorption, and Raman scattering all depend on the electronic states of the molecule which in turn are influenced by the vibrational frequencies. For
instance, in a spectroscopic setting, these properties could be used to extract information
about unknown molecules. For molecular engineering of solar cells or photosynthetic materials, it may be necessary to have molecules meeting particular constraints on these properties.
However, it may be prohibitively expensive in time or resources to experimentally test every
candidate molecule; simulation of vibronic spectra then becomes a valuable tool. A quantum
algorithm to solve this problem is detailed later in Section 5.3.2; here, we will motivate the
development of such algorithm by discussing the complexity-theoretic limitations of solving
the problem with only classical methods.

42

To describe molecular vibronic processes, it was shown by Duschinsky 219 that a linear
relationship between the initial and final normal coordinates (~q and q~0 , respectively) could
be given by
q~0 = UDus q~ + ~
d,

(17)

where UDus is a real-valued matrix called the Duschinsky matrix, and d~ is a displacement
vector. Doktorov et al. 220 show that this corresponds to a unitary rotation ÛDok of the
bosonic ladder operators
†
a0† = ÛDok
a† ÛDok ,

(18)

ÛDok = ŜΩ† 0 R̂U ŜΩ D̂δ ,

(19)

~ ŜΩ0 (ŜΩ ) a squeezing
where D̂δ corresponds to a displacement operator dependent on d,
operator whose parameters depend on the harmonic angular frequencies of the transition, and
R̂U a rotation corresponding to UDus 221 . The distribution of non-trivial transition amplitudes
ω at 0 K gives rise to the FCP,

F CP (ω) =

X
m

2

| hm| UDok |0i | δ ωvib −

N
X

!
ωk0 mk

(20)

k

where |0i is the ground state of the initial vibronic potential, |mi is an eigenmode of the final
vibronic potential of eigenenergies m = (m1 , · · · , mM ), where M = 3N − 6 is the number
of degrees of freedom (vibronic modes) in an N -atom molecule. The set {mk } consists of all
possible configurations of phonons leading to allowed transitions of energy ωvib . The inner
product hm| UDok |0i, known as Franck-Condon integral, is thus a product-sum over the all
phonon configurations contributing to ω. This product-sum corresponds to the computation
of a matrix permanent. The permanent of an n × n matrix M is defined by
perm(M ) =

n
XY
σ∈Sn i=1

43

mi,σ(i) ,

(21)

which has a similar definition to the determinant of M , sans an additional product of each
term with sgn(σ). Colloquially, the permanent is often described as the “determinant with
all + signs.”
Despite the permanent’s similarity to the determinant, the two functions in general exhibit dramatically different complexities. While the determinant can be efficiently computed
(in O(n3 ) steps) by reduction to row-echelon form via elementary row operations (called
Gaussian elimination), the permanent of a matrix is not invariant under row operations.
Valiant 222 realized that the permanent was an archetypal problem for a complexity class of
counting problems, which he coined #P. Recall that NP problems can be thought of as
asking “Does at least one satisfying assignment exist for some criteria?” Problems in #P,
on the other hand, are characterized by finding how many satisfying assignments exist for
the same criteria, a much more difficult task. It then followed, Valiant showed, that an
exact and efficient algorithm for permanent computation, even for a matrix of only binary
valued entries, would imply that P=NP. The expectation is, then, that #P problems will
be hard to compute. Indeed, the best known general algorithm today for exactly solving
matrix permanents is due to Ryser 223 , requiring at least O(n2n ) operations.
It is important to realize that, although matrix permanents may be hard to compute
or even estimate, determining the FCP is more precisely a sampling problem. That is,
although the hardness of the permanent is a necessary condition for the FCP sampling
problem to be hard, it is not known to be a sufficient condition. There is, however, compelling
evidence in the literature to suggest that the sampling problem as such is indeed hard as
well. Particular instances of the FCP reduce to an instance of the recently-developed linear
optics architecture, boson sampling 64,224–227 . This prompted Huh and Yung 228 to devise
an algorithm for sampling from the FCP using an optical quantum computer, which is
summarized in Section 5.3.2.
It remains unclear whether or not the family of chemically relevant problems is generally in the set of instances for which an optical quantum computer could significantly

44

speed up the calculation. Complexity-theoretic results hold for average-case Haar-random
or Gaussian-random unitary matrices, but chemical problems do not correspond to choosing
randomly from these sets. This is consistent with classical algorithmic approaches whose
techniques leverage approximations that take into account the physical symmetries of the
system to generate solutions 229 . However, these techniques will only give efficient and accurate solutions in some problem instances where the approximations are valid. It remains to
be seen whether or not an efficient and fully generalizable classical approach exists. While
the search for this approach continues, there is room for quantum computers to tackle the
hardest of these chemical problems.

3.4

Chapter 3 Glossary

q~ (~q 0 )

Initial (final) normal coordinates

UDus

Duschinsky rotation

R̂U

Rotation corresponding to UDus

UDok

Doktorov rotation

d~

Displacement vector

a, a†

Bosonic annihilation and creation operators

D̂δ

Displacement operator

ŜΩ

Squeezing operator

m

Eigenmode corresponding to photon transitions

mk

Phonon configuration

ω

Distribution of vibronic transition amplitudes

ωvib

Allowed energy transitions

N

Number of atoms in a molecule

M

Number of vibrionic modes in an N -atom molecule

F CP (ω)

Franck-Condon profile distribution

perm(·)

Matrix permanent
45

δ(·)

Dirac delta function

Sn

Symmetric group of n elements

σ

Permutation of Sn

sgn(·)

Sign, or parity, of a permutation (equal to +1 if even, and −1 otherwise)

M

An arbitrary matrix

n

Dimension of M

mi,j

The i, j-th entry of the matrix M

NP

Non-deterministic polynomial time (complexity class)

P

Deterministic polynomial time (complexity class)

#P

Sharp-P (complexity class)

BQP

Bounded-probability quantum polynomial (complexity class)

QMA

Quantum Merlin-Arthur (complexity class)

#BQP

Sharp-BQP (complexity class)

2RDM

Two-electron reduced density matrices

HF

Hartree-Fock

TDDFT

Time-dependent density functional theory

FCP

Franck-Condon profile

4

Quantum simulation algorithms for fault-tolerant quantum computers

Quantum computation was born out of the idea that a controllable quantum system could be
used to simulate the dynamics of a different quantum system. As described in the previous
section, it has been shown that a quantum computer consisting of quantum bits and elementary unitary operations can solve the computational problem of simulating unitary evolution
for a physically realistic system efficiently (c.f. Table 2). The purpose of this section is to
provide a motivating narrative, guiding the reader through the significant advances in the
46

field of quantum simulation and its applications to the electronic structure problem. These
advances have carried the idea of quantum simulation from a theoretical proposal to the
premier application of near-term quantum computers.
In its simplest form, quantum simulation entails two steps. First, the quantum system
of interest must be mapped onto the qubits of the quantum computer. Second, the unitary
evolution of the simulated system must be translated into a sequence of elementary operations. The original proposals of quantum simulation in the early 1980s, by Manin 28 and
Feynman 230 , were motivated by the inefficiency of simulating quantum systems using classical processors. Their revolutionary idea was that, while the scaling of the number of classical
bits needed to store a wave function of N quantum systems grows as O(exp(N )), the scaling
of quantum bits needed to store this wave function is1 O(N ). The caveat is that the amplitudes of a wave function stored in quantum bits cannot be efficiently accessed. Obtaining a
classical description of the quantum state would require repeated quantum simulation and
tomography which essentially eliminates all the savings. Instead, one can use quantum simulation to compute expectation values of observables 38 , sample from a given distribution 63 ,
or use the simulation as a subroutine in more complicated quantum algorithms 231,232 .
In this setting, quantum computers can provide an exponential improvement in memory resources for quantum simulation compared to a naive approach using a wave function.
Of course, there are classical methods for computing expectation values that do not require storing the wave function, but the ability to manipulate a discretization of the wave
function directly opened a floodgate of new results in quantum algorithms for quantum
chemistry 37,40,41,75,233 .
It is important that the wave function can be efficiently evolved in time for many “physically realistic” Hamiltonians 37 . That is, with respect to a desired accuracy and duration of
the time evolution, the number of quantum gates (roughly, computation time) grows polyno1

Here the notation O(N ) indicates an asymptotic upper bound on the scaling of the algorithm that is
e ), indicates suppression of polylogarithmic
linear in N . A tilde on top of the bound notation, e.g. O(N
factors. In contrast to formally rigorous bounds, a tilde inside of a bound, e.g. O(∼ N ), indicates the bound
is obtained empirically.

47

mially in system size, time, and inverse-precision. In practice, we are interested not only in
the scaling but also in the actual amount of resources needed to execute an algorithm. Over
the years, requirements for quantum simulation of a real-world system have been steadily
lowered. The state-of-art quantum algorithms achieve scaling roughly logarithmic in inverse
precision and linear in time. We review the progress in quantum simulations in Section 4.1.
In quantum chemistry, it is relatively uncommon to directly simulate the dynamics of
a quantum wave function. Instead, the standard task is to determine the ground state
energy of a quantum system. Solving such an eigenvalue problem exactly is a much more
challenging problem than the Hamiltonian simulation. In fact, this problem known to be
QMA-complete, for a general Hamiltonian, as discussed in Section 3. However, there are
several assumptions that make this problem easier for realistic systems, as discussed in
Section 3.
The quantum algorithms that we discuss in this section were designed for quantum computers that function without error. In practice, quantum computers are error-prone due to
both imprecision of processes and unwanted interaction with the environment. These defects
limit the length of the programs that can be accurately executed. The algorithms described
in this section are typically beyond this limit. Thus, only proof-of-principle demonstrations
for simple problems have been executed thus far 55,234–236 .
Given the difficulty to engineer precise gates and stable qubits, one might be skeptical
about the prospect of quantum algorithms requiring coherence. However, it is possible to
correct the errors and the system of detecting and correcting for errors is called an error
correcting code 237 . In brief, the principle behind quantum error correction is to use more
physical qubits to establish a set of fewer, but higher-fidelity, equivalent qubits called logical
qubits 238 . A rough, conservative estimate for the ratio of physical to logical qubits needed
for reliable quantum computation is 10,000-to-1 237 but depends on the realization of physical
qubits, type of noise and the properties of the error correcting code. The ability to gain a
digit in precision for a quantum computation per fixed cost of quantum resources (e.g. the

48

number of qubits and operations) is known as fault-tolerance 239 . Given enough time, a faulttolerant quantum computer is able to execute an arbitrarily long circuit without sacrificing
accuracy.
The emphasis on fault-tolerance is important for this section because here we focus on
quantum algorithms which assume the underlying quantum computer is fault tolerant. In
Section 5 we will discuss quantum algorithms for quantum chemistry which, a priori, do not
require quantum error correction because of more shallow circuits. The remainder of this
section is organized as follows (see also Figure 1). In Section 4.1 we discuss techniques for
simulating general quantum systems on a quantum computer, which contains simulating time
evolution under a given Hamiltonian (Section 4.1.1) as well as other components needed for
extracting the spectrum of the Hamiltonian by phase estimation (Sections 4.1.2 and 4.1.3).
In Section 4.2 we discuss applications of these techniques to quantum chemistry problems.
Section 4.2 is further split into three subsections corresponding to high-level components of a
quantum algorithm for quantum chemistry. In Section 4.2.1 we discuss methods for preparing
the initial states for an algorithm. Next, we consider simulation methods in Section 4.2.2 and
we conclude with methods for efficiently extracting useful information out of an algorithm
in Section 4.2.3.

4.1

Quantum algorithms for energy estimation

The observation that quantum systems appear to be difficult to simulate was one of the forces
driving early quantum computing research. Together with the algorithm for factoring 32 ,
Hamiltonian simulation 37 was one of the landmark achievements of quantum algorithms in
the 1990s. Quantum simulations are closely connected to other quantum computing schemes
such as linear systems 240 , thermal state generation 241 and quantum machine learning 242–244 .
In addition, Hamiltonian simulation together with phase estimation can be used for estimating eigenvalues.

49

4.1.1

General Hamiltonian simulation

We begin our discussion of Hamiltonian simulation by describing the breakthrough paper of
Lloyd 37 , which laid the theoretical foundation for much of the later work in this field. As
described above, while the work of Manin 28 and Feynman 230 proposed the idea of quantum
computers for solving the memory storage issue with quantum simulation, the work of Lloyd
gave a rigorous upper bound on the computational time for quantum simulation. We emphasize that Lloyd’s result applies to a particular approach to quantum simulation, known as
gate-based or digital quantum simulation. This approach is distinct from an analog quantum
simulation, for which there have been several recent ground-breaking experiments 245–249 .
In an analog quantum simulation, the physical Hamiltonian of the controllable quantum
system is engineered to correspond directly to the Hamiltonian of the system of interest.
In a digital Hamiltonian simulation, the dynamics of the targeted system are approximated
by a sequence of elementary quantum gates. We give a brief overview of quantum gates
(see Appendix C.4) but recommend Nielsen and Chuang 1 for a reader unfamiliar with this
formalism. The advantage of the digital simulation approach is its aim for universality: any
feasible Hamiltonian can be digitally simulated. Unless otherwise stated, by “Hamiltonian
simulation”, we mean digital Hamiltonian simulation of a closed quantum system under a
time-independent Hamiltonian.
Informally, the task of Hamiltonian simulation is to construct a sequence of quantum
gates which approximate the Hamiltonian evolution of an input state under the action of
the operator e−iHt . For an arbitrary Hamiltonian H, the number of elementary gates needed
to construct U (t) = e−iHt grows exponentially with the number of qubits 1 . Accordingly,
Lloyd’s result, or any other efficient Hamiltonian simulation algorithm, requires the simulated
Hamiltonian to have a special structure. The structure assumed in Lloyd’s analysis is that
the Hamiltonian describes only local interactions. That is, the Hamiltonian of interest is

50

mapped to an N -qubit Hamiltonian which takes the form

H=

`
X

Hj ,

(22)

j=1

where each Hj acts on at most k qubits and each e−iHj ∆t is easy to implement for a short
time segment ∆t.
The local interaction assumption leads to a quantum algorithm for approximating the
time dynamics. The key insight is to use the Trotter decomposition to approximate the exact
evolution as U (t) ≈ (e−iH1 t/n . . . e−iH` t/n )n . From the local interactions assumption, each of
the factors e−iHj t/n is a unitary which acts on a constant number of qubits (i.e. independent
of N ). These local unitary transformations can, in principle, be decomposed into a number
of elementary gates that is independent of N .
The formal result from Lloyd’s paper is that, for a Hamiltonian of ` terms describing
k-body interactions, U (t) can be approximated within error  by a sequence of O(`τ 2 /)
elementary quantum gates 250 , where τ = ||H||t. Assuming that the number of terms ` in
the Hamiltonian scales polynomially with the system size N (such as the number of particles
or the number of qubits), then the scaling of the number of gates is polynomial in N , τ ,
and 1/. Thus, the Trotter decomposition for local-interaction Hamiltonian simulation is
efficient. It is worth noting that Lloyd also gives an algorithm for simulating open-system
dynamics. Following this first algorithm for digital quantum simulation, several questions
drove the field of quantum simulation:
• Does there exist an algorithm for Hamiltonians which are not necessarily local?
• Is it possible to improve the scaling in terms of t, 1/, and the norm of the Hamiltonian
||H||?
• Can we move beyond Hamiltonian evolution and implement evolution of open systems
or evolution under a time-dependent Hamiltonian?

51

• Can we exploit structure in quantum chemistry Hamiltonians to improve algorithmic
performance?
This last question, in particular, has led to major advances in quantum simulation for quantum chemistry and will be the focus of Section 4.2.2. But first, we will briefly review the
major advances in the field of general Hamiltonian simulation.
Dodd et al. 251 and Nielsen et al. 252 built on the work of Lloyd 37 and gave algorithms for
simulating Hamiltonians that are a sum of tensor products of Pauli matrices. Independently,
Aharonov and Ta-Shma 253 introduced the sparse Hamiltonian paradigm and thus addressed
the first two questions above. This approach provides a means for efficiently simulating
(i.e. with gate count poly(N, t, 1/, d)) Hamiltonians which have fewer than d entries in each
column (d-sparse) and includes local Hamiltonians as a special case. A sparse Hamiltonian
is a Hamiltonian for which d ∈ poly(n). It is natural to ask how to represent such a
Hamiltonian since storing (an exponential number of) the coefficients in memory would
require an exponential overhead. Indeed, one needs to have a way of efficiently computing
these coefficients in superposition. Instead of constraining ourselves to one implementation,
it is customary to assume access to the Hamiltonian through oracles

Oloc |k, r, zi = |k, r, z ⊕ li ,

(23)

Oval |l, r, zi = |l, r, z ⊕ Hl,r i .

(24)

The oracle Oloc locates the column l of the k-th non-zero element in the row r. The oracle Oval
then gives the (non-zero) value of the matrix element Hr,l . Both oracles are by construction
involutory and therefore unitary.
If such oracles can be constructed from a polynomial number of elementary gates, we say
that the Hamiltonian is row-computable. An important subclass of d-sparse Hamiltonians are
d-local Hamiltonians. A Hamiltonian is d-local if it can be written as a sum of polynomially
(in the number of qubits) many terms where each term acts non-trivially on at most d
52

qubits. Depending on the context, the qubit may or may not be spatially close. As such
many physically-relevant Hamiltonians are sparse 254 or even local 186,255 .
Several other oracles are used in Hamiltonian simulation literature. Childs and Wiebe 256
introduced the unitary access oracle. In this model, the Hamiltonian is represented as a
P
linear combination of unitaries H = L−1
j=0 αj Vj . For an efficient simulation, L ∈ poly(N )
and therefore the coefficients αj can be represented classically. The unitaries Vj are given
through an oracle
select(V ) |ji |ψi = |ji Vj |ψi

(25)

that acts directly on the data. Berry et al. 187 showed that one query to select(V ) can be
implemented with d2 calls to Oloc and Oval . Tensor products of Pauli matrices are a special
case of the unitaries Vj .
Later, Low and Chuang 189 introduced the signal oracle Usignal such that in a subspace
flagged by an ancilla in a signal state |Gi, H = hG| Usignal |Gi. This case arises from a
linear combination of unitaries. Other Hamiltonian access models include efficiently indexcomputable Hamiltonians 257 , special data structures 258 and Hamiltonian encoded into a density matrix as a quantum software state 243,259 . Since a density matrix is Hermitian, it is
possible to exponentiate it and use for generating time evolution. While not commonly used
in quantum chemistry yet, density matrix exponentiation has been used in multiple quantum
machine learning algorithms 243 .
We estimate the cost of the Hamiltonian simulation in terms of the number of calls
or queries to these oracles as well as the number of gates. Since each query requires a
construction of the Hamiltonian, query complexity often dominates the cost of an algorithm.
The concept of an oracle provides a useful abstraction for designing algorithms for a wide
spectrum of Hamiltonians. In practice, however, it is not always necessary to explicitly
construct an oracle directly if the Hamiltonian has a structure that can be exploited directly.
An example of such a structure is a sum of Pauli terms 188,196,260 . Along the line of oracular
versus non-oracular approaches, we review the results in Hamiltonian simulations following
53

two different avenues.
In the first one, the Hamiltonian is first decomposed into a sum of terms H =

P

j Hj ,

where each eiHj t can be implemented directly, and use a Trotter decomposition to approximate the evolution under the sum of Hamiltonians 253 . These approaches are typically
referred to as product formula algorithms. The original Aharonov and Ta-Shma work established a query complexity of O(poly(N, d)(τ 2 /)), which matches the gate complexity
of Lloyd’s algorithm, but applies to a broader class of d-sparse Hamiltonians 250 . This set
the stage for a wave of improvements in the query complexity. First, by more sophisticated Trotter-Suzuki decompositions 261 , the approximation error can be made to depend on
progressively-higher orders in τ 196,260,261 . Intuitively, one can achieve a more favorable error
scaling by using more precise approximations for the exponential of a sum. In the simplest
case, the symmetric Trotter formula e(A+B)∆t ≈ eA∆t/2 eB∆t eA∆t/2 suppresses O(∆t2 ) errors.
Second, by considering more favorable schemes for Hamiltonian decomposition 256,257 , most
modern-day simulation algorithms scale in terms of τmax = tkHkmax instead of τ , where
kHkmax is the absolute value of the largest entry of H as a matrix in the computational
basis.
The second approach comes from the equivalence between continuous- and discrete-time
quantum walks 262 . This work improved the dependence on time and sparsity but did not
match the error scaling of contemporaneous algorithms. Unlike the previous results, it did
not rely on Hamiltonian decomposition and can be used for certain non-sparse Hamiltonians.
Childs 257 showed that given oracle access to a Hamiltonian with eigenvalues λ, one can
construct a unitary quantum walk operator with eigenvalues e±i arcsin λ . The computationally
difficult part is to un-compute the arcsin in the phase. Childs does this by estimating the
phase arcsin λ using phase estimation and coherently applying the sin function onto the
phase. The use of phase estimation is responsible for a relatively poor scaling in the error .
While these algorithms reduced the asymptotic complexity of Hamiltonian simulation,
this came at the cost of increased sophistication of the methods. A breakthrough in quantum

54

simulation methods came in 2014 when Berry et al. presented an algorithm that exponentially improved the dependence on precision 187 . A series of improvements resulted in the
development of a relatively straight-forward technique, which considers a decomposition of
P
188
the Hamiltonian into a linear combination of unitary operators (LCU) H =
.
j αj Uj
The Hamiltonian evolution is first divided into shorter segments. Then, each segment is
approximated by a truncated Taylor series

e−iH∆t ≈

K
X
(−i∆t)
k=0

k!

!k
X

αj Uj

,

(26)

j

which, itself, is a linear combination of unitaries. A technique called oblivious amplitude
amplification 187 is then used to turn black-box implementations of the individual unitaries
into a desired linear combination. Oblivious amplitude amplification allowed for the implementation of algorithms based on existing probabilistic schemes 256 with near-perfect success.
log(d2 τmax /)
LCU has a query complexity of O(d2 τ log log(d2 τmax /) ), which is optimal in inverse-precision.
This approach is particularly appealing for quantum chemistry application where each Uj is
a tensor product of Pauli matrices. These Hamiltonians can be implemented without the use
L) log (T /)
) gates, where n is the number of the qubits in the
of oracles requiring O(T L(n+log
log log (T /)
P
simulated system, L is the number number of terms in the Hamiltonian and T = L−1
j=0 αj .

The major open question was whether or not this query complexity scaling could be
reduced to being additive in its τ and  dependence, rather than multiplicative. Such a
dependence was known to be a lower bound on the asymptotic query complexity 187 . In
2016, Low and Chuang developed algorithms based on quantum signal processing 190 and
qubitization 189 which achieve this provably optimal asymptotic scaling in query complexity
of O(dτmax + loglog(1/)
), achieving the sought-after “additive” approximation error.
log(1/)
P
Quantum signal processing refers to the ability to transform a unitary W = λ eiθλ |uλ ihuλ |
as
W → Videal =

X
λ

55

eih(θλ ) |uλ ihuλ |

(27)

for any real function h. Using the phase-kickback trick 263 , one can modify the spectrum
by manipulating an ancilla qubit. The transformation is then implemented through single
qubit rotations on the ancilla and repeated applications of control-W . Low et al. 264 fully
characterize the transformations that can be implemented this way. In short, the transformations are first approximated by a tuple of polynomials whose degree determines the query
complexity of the algorithm. If the polynomials form an achievable tuple, they can be turned
into single qubit rotations and implemented through quantum signal processing.
Since the walk operator given by Childs 257 has eigenvalues e±i arcsin λ where λ is an eigenvalue of the Hamiltonian, h(θ) = −τ sin (θ) gives time evolution. The transformation is
approximated by the Jacobi-Anger expansion that satisfies the criteria of achievability and
its quick convergence results in the optimal scaling of the algorithm. Qubitization 265 takes
these ideas one step further and explains how to combine LCU with quantum signal processing. The core of this idea is to modify the signal oracle to obtain 2-dimensional invariant
subspaces analogous to the construction in Grover’s algorithm 35 .
The quantum signal processing approach was later simplified and generalized into singular
value transformations by Gilyén et al. 266 and can be applied to a wide array of applications
beyond quantum simulation. More recent work has focused on the possibility of improvements in the scaling with different norms of the Hamiltonian and spectral amplification 265,267 .
Low and Wiebe 197 introduced Hamiltonian simulation in the interaction picture. A
Hamiltonians with components H = A + B can be transformed into an interaction picture
Hamiltonian as HI (t) = eiAt Be−iAt . The time evolution in the interaction picture then
corresponds to the evolution under a time-dependent Hamiltonian HI (t). The dominant
scaling comes from simulating the interaction terms B while A is chosen to be a part of the
Hamiltonian that is easy to simulate. If the norm of A is much larger than the norm of B, say
for a diagonally dominant matrix, interaction picture simulations can lead to an exponential
improvement over existing techniques. Recently, Low 265 combined multiple methods 189,190,197
to further improve scaling with respect to the norm of the Hamiltonian. This approach

56

improves the dependence on sparsity by utilizing information about the spectral norm.
Quantum simulation algorithms have been developed in other important dynamical regimes.
The work of Wang and Wossnig 268 and Kimmel et al. 259 considered simulation of non-sparse
Hamiltonians. Advances paralleling the time-independent results have been carried out for
time-dependent Hamiltonians, using Trotter-Suzuki decompositions 269,270 . Very recently, a
truncated Dyson series algorithm was developed 199 which achieves the logarithmic scaling
in inverse-precision, analogous to the truncated Taylor series method for time-independent
simulation.
Beyond unitary dynamics, a small line of inquiry has investigated general algorithms
for open quantum dynamics, beginning with the case of local Markovian (or local Lindblad) dynamics 271 . Algorithms with improved scaling were recently developed, drawing on
techniques from unitary simulation such as improved product decompositions, sparse Hamiltonian methods, and the linear-combination of unitaries approach 194,195 .
It is quite remarkable that algorithms with optimal asymptotic scaling have been discovered. In practice, however, we must consider the exact gate counts to determine which
algorithm is the best in a particular instance. A recent study 272 showed that different algorithms fare better in different regimes. In particular, product-formula based algorithms
required fewer resources than quantum signal processing in a numerical simulation for systems between 10 and 100 qubits. In Section 4.2, we will turn to such considerations in the
context of Hamiltonian simulation for quantum chemistry.
4.1.2

Quantum phase estimation

Hamiltonian simulation is rarely used as a standalone algorithm. For the purposes of quantum chemistry, its main application is as a subroutine in the quantum phase estimation
algorithm (QPEA) 231,263 , which is sometimes referred to as the “von Neumann trick” 273 .
It gives an exponential advantage to many of the algorithms reviewed in the next section.
Given a unitary operator eiΦ and an approximate eigenstate of that operator prepared on the

57

quantum computer, the quantum phase estimation algorithm is used to efficiently output a
binary representation of the corresponding phase Φ. In our case, the operator corresponds
to a unitary evolution eiHt and phase estimation is used to extract information about the
spectrum of the Hamiltonian.

Figure 3: Circuit performing quantum phase estimation with three ancilla qubits. First,
the Hadamard gate (labeled “Had”) is applied on each ancilla qubit to create a uniform
superposition. Next, a series of controlled operations U that corresponds to Hamiltonian
evolution e−iHt are applied. Finally, the inverse QFT is used, see 4.1.3. The input is given
by one register (consisting of the top three qubits in this specific diagram) initialized to zero
and a second register containing the desired eigenstate of H. (The general case where the
second register contains a superposition of eigenstates is discussed in the main text.) After
execution, the first register stores an approximation of the eigenenergy of |ψm i. Please see
AppendixC.4 or Nielsen and Chuang 1 for an introduction to quantum circuits.

A circuit representation of the algorithm is shown in Figure 3. The QPEA uses two
separate registers of qubits.
The first register of T ancilla qubits is used to read out the binary representation of
λm . For simplicity, assume that the state |ψm i in the second register is an eigenstate of the
unitary U for which we want to compute the eigenenergy λm .
After each ancilla qubit is initialized in the state |0i, a Hadamard gate is applied to each
P
to prepare this register in an equal superposition of all computational basis states √12T x |xi.
k

In the first step of reading out λm , the phase (e−iλm t )2 is imprinted on the kth ancilla qubit
as


k
(|0i + |1i) |ψm i → |0i + e−2 iλm t |1i |ψm i .
58

(28)

k

This is achieved via “phase-kickback” 34,263 by applying a controlled-U 2 between this qubit
and the state preparation register in |ψm i. Finally, the inverse quantum Fourier transform
(see Section 4.1.3) is applied to the ancilla register to convert the state to a computational
basis state |x1 x2 . . . xT i that expresses the binary representation of λm t/2π ≈ 0.x1 x2 . . . xT .
After execution of the algorithm, measurement of the first register will yield a binary approximation of the eigenenergy λm with a high probability. It can be shown that with
 
probability at least 1 − , the estimation of λm is accurate to T − dlog 2 + 21 e bits 1 .
Roughly speaking, each ancilla adds another digit of accuracy.
Let us now examine the case when the second register is not an eigenstate but rather
P
a superposition m am |ψi. One can perform the above analysis and convince oneself that
E
P
em t/2π |ψm i where λ
em is a fixed-point approximation
phase estimation will yield m am λ
of the eigenenergy λm . After measuring of the first register, the second register will collapse
in the corresponding eigenstate. The probability of obtaining the eigenstate λm is |am |2 , i.e.
the squared overlap between the eigenstate with the prepared superposition. Therefore, it
is possible to obtain multiple eigenstates and eigenenergies of H by running QPEA repeatedly with an appropriately chosen initial state |φi, highlighting the importance of the state
preparation step, as discussed in Section 4.2.1.
QPEA is closely linked to Hamiltonian simulation algorithms because of the controlledk

U 2 transformations. Each of these transformations can be decomposed into a sequence
k

of gates by first decomposing U 2 into a sequence of gates using Hamiltonian simulation
methods from Section 4.1, then augmenting each gate into a controlled gate with a certain
ancilla qubit. Accordingly, advances in quantum algorithms for Hamiltonian simulation lead
to improvements in the performance of QPEA. We note, however, that certain methods,
such as quantum random access memory (quantum RAM) 274 , could provide an alternative
means of implementing the powers of controlled unitaries.
In the standard QPEA, the accuracy of the estimated eigenvalue is determined by the
number of ancilla qubits. As detailed by Aspuru-Guzik et al. 45 and Dobšı́ček et al. 275 , the

59

number of ancilla qubits can be greatly reduced, while maintaining the same precision by
using the iterative quantum phase estimation algorithm (IPEA). Feeding back on the rotation
angle of the quantum gates, the phase estimation is improved in each step.
Further improvements to the quantum phase estimation algorithm have been made by
introducing Bayesian inference techniques 276,277 . In this way, the maximum amount of information is extracted from previous measurements in order to inform the rotation angles for the
next evaluation of the algorithm. Wiebe and Granade 277 have shown that the eigenenergy
and its uncertainty can thus be inferred directly rather than iteratively. This Bayesian estimation approach to quantum phase estimation has recently been shown experimentally 278 ,
demonstrating its robustness to noise and decoherence.
The use of the time evolution operator in phase estimation is not necessary for the
quantum phase estimation algorithm. Recent work 279–281 has investigated using unitaries
which encode the spectrum of the Hamiltonian, but are easier to implement than e−iHt .
As long as the alternative unitary is determined by a known invertible function f of the
Hamiltonian, as e−if (H)t , then the measured eigenphase of this unitary can be used to infer
the corresponding eigenvalue of H. The unitary ei arccos(H/λ) can be implemented using a
quantum walk operator 189 which requires fewer gates than time evolution.
4.1.3

Quantum Fourier transform

Many important quantum algorithms, including Shor’s factoring algorithm 32 , rely on the
quantum Fourier transform (QFT) 282 as a subroutine. The QFT underlies the problem of
Forrelation 283 , which is said to “capture the maximal power of quantum computation”. In
the context of the quantum phase estimation algorithm, the QFT is the final step before
measuring the ancilla qubits that carry the binary representation of the energy estimate.
After the various powers of the eigenphases have been applied to the ancilla qubits (c.f.
Figure 3), the QFT is used to convert these powers of phases into a binary representation of
the eigenenergy on these qubits.

60

Figure 4: Quantum Fourier transform circuit for four qubits, reproduced from Nielsen and
Chuang 1 . SWAP gates that reverse the order of the states at the end are not shown. The
k
Hadamard gates are labeled “Had”, gates Rk indicate a rotation over the angle e2πi/2 ,
0.j1 j2 ...jn denotes a binary fraction.

The quantum Fourier transform operation can be understood as a unitary change of
basis from the computational basis to the Fourier basis. Mathematically, it closely resembles its classical counterpart, the discrete Fourier transform. Given an orthonormal basis
|0i , |1i , . . . , |N − 1i, the action of the quantum Fourier transform (QFT) on a basis state
|ji is given by

N −1

1 X 2πijk/N
e
|ki .
QFT |ji = √
N k=0

(29)

We now change to a binary representation j = j1 2n−1 + j2 2n−2 + ... + jn 20 =: j1 j2 ...jn with n
bits, where N = 2n . This allows us to write the state |ji as a multi-qubit state |j1 , j2 , ..., jn i.
The Fourier transform now assumes the following form:

QFT |j1 , j2 , ..., jn i =

(|0i + e2πi0.jn |1i) (|0i + e2πi0.jn−1 jn |1i) ... (|0i + e2πi0.j1 j2 ...jn |1i)
2n/2

(30)

Here, the terms 0.j1 j2 ...jn denote a binary fraction.
Computing the quantum Fourier transform requires a sequence of Hadamard gates and
controlled rotations. In Figure 4, we show this circuit for four qubits. The following operations are applied to each qubit, successively from top to bottom qubit: a Hadamard gate
followed by rotations Rk that are controlled by the qubits below. The rotation angle of the
k

gate Rk is given by e2πi/2 . As indicated in the figure, the final state of the register is equal to
61

Eq. 30 up to a reversal of the qubit state order. Although this circuit is complex and dense,
it often serves merely as a subroutine within other algorithms. It will usually be written as
“QFT” or “FT” in circuit diagrams. The inverse Fourier transform, given by the Hermitian
conjugate QFT† , is at least as ubiquitous.
The quantum Fourier transform has also found application in simulating chemical dynamics. The quantum “split-operator” method 75,273 is analogous to classical exact wave function
simulation techniques such as matching pursuit/split-operator Fourier transform 176 . During
simulation, the kinetic and interaction/potential energy terms can both be implemented diagonally by applying the quantum Fourier transform to change between the momentum and
position basis. It has been shown that this technique leads to quantum speedups both for
first- and second-quantized problem formulations 40,75,254,284 .

4.2

Determining the ground states energies of quantum chemistry
Hamiltonians

Beneath the massive computational resources devoted to determining properties of molecules
and materials lies the electronic structure problem. The importance of this problem derives
from the fact that the quantum mechanical eigenenergies and wave functions of the electrons in a molecular system are essential for understanding and predicting industry-relevant
quantities, including reaction rates, binding energies, and molecular pathways. In particular,
the ground state energy as a function of the nuclear coordinates (the ground state energy
manifold) of a molecular system is sufficient for gleaning many of these properties.
In the late 1990s, quantum computing scientists began to develop approaches for estimating static properties of molecular systems using techniques for simulating time dynamics. The
standard approach requires first preparing the quantum computer in the desired quantum
state (e.g. an approximation of the ground state of a molecular system) and then extracting
the properties of interest (e.g. the ground state energy) using QPEA. We will review the
development of necessary techniques in this section.
62

4.2.1

State preparation

The first step of any quantum algorithm is the preparation of an initial state. The success
of an algorithm for determining ground state energy depends on the quality of the state
preparation. The ansatz for the preparation comes from a classical approximation for a
ground state of a given Hamiltonian. Such a state must have two properties. First, the
ansatz needs to a have a significant overlap with the ground state. Second, the state has to
be efficiently preparable on a quantum computer. Examples of state preparation include the
Hartree-Fock (HF) state, states from coupled-cluster methods, or states obtained using the
method of adiabatic quantum evolution. Quantum computers are particularly useful when
classical methods cannot provide answers with high-accuracy such as for strongly correlated
systems.
In his pioneering work, Zalka 41 considered discretizing the wave function and initializing
simulation through a series of controlled rotations. Grover and Rudolph 285 gave a similar algorithm to prepare a state corresponding to an efficiently integrable probability distribution.
However, this would be a costly procedure in practice.
Abrams and Lloyd 38 focused on state preparation in more detail and described concrete
initialization procedures. They pointed out that state preparation is conceptually easier in
second quantization, where a Fock state is represented by a simple product state of qubits in
{|0i , |1i} states. Their algorithm begins with all qubits reset to |0 . . . 0i. Fermi statistics are
automatically accounted for in the creation and annihilation operators. In first quantization,
one must initialize a completely antisymmetric state. Antisymmetrization can be enforced
by reversing a suitable sorting algorithm and uncomputing ancillas to make the procedure
reversible 286 . Recently, Berry et al. 279 improved the antisymmetrization procedure by using
a sorting network and optimizing components of the algorithm. This algorithm achieves a
gate count scaling of O(η log η log N ) and a circuit depth of O(log η log log N ) where η stands
for the number of particles and N ≥ η for the number of single-particle basis functions. These
are, respectively, a polynomial and an exponential improvement over the previous algorithm.
63

The choice of the initial state for ground state energy estimation was considered by
Aspuru-Guzik et al. 45 . HF is the usual starting point for state preparation, however, it
might not always have a sufficient overlap with the ground state. Tubman et al. 287 recently
investigated the support of HF on the ground state. For small molecules, HF provides a good
approximation for the ground state, for example, 0.77 for FeMoCo 287 . The applicability of
other methods was investigated in cases when HF fails. Wang et al. 46 investigated preparing states which are generated with the multi-configurational self-consistent field (MCSCF)
approach. These states have non-zero overlap with a polynomial number of computational
basis states, for which there are efficient methods of preparation 288 . In addition to having
better overlap with the ground state, MCSCF states express the electron correlation needed
to represent low-level excited states.
Kassal et al. 75 combined state preparation with a proposal for preparing the nuclear
ground-state wave function to investigate the simulation of a chemical reaction without the
Born-Oppenheimer approximation. They conclude that simulating the complete nuclear and
electronic wave function in a chemical reaction of four or more particles is more efficient than
using the Born-Oppenheimer approximation.
Recently, Tubman et al. 287,289 introduced the adaptive sampling configuration interaction
method (ASCI). ASCI allows for the generation of a small number of determinants while
accounting for at least 90% of the wave function. Sugisaki et al. 233 extended the HF state
preparation by proposing an algorithm for efficiently preparing an exponential number of
Slater determinants. Their proposal is particularly appealing for preparing configuration
state functions of open-shell molecules.
Adiabatic state preparation (ASP), proposed by Aspuru-Guzik et al. 45 , is a method
for transforming the initially-prepared HF state into an approximation of the FCI groundstate wave function. The idea draws on the method of adiabatic quantum computing 290
(c.f. Section 5.3.1). ASP initializes the register in the HF state. For a second-quantized
Hamiltonian, the HF state may be prepared as a product state on the qubits and is, therefore,

64

easy to prepare 45 . The state is then evolved with respect to a circuit that approximates an
adiabatic change in the Hamiltonian starting from the HF Hamiltonian and ending with the
full Hamiltonian. The adiabatic evolution is then digitally simulated either with a product
formula decomposition 270 or truncated Dyson series 197,199 . If the Hamiltonian and its first
derivative are upper-bounded by a constant, a good approximation of the ground state can be
 
reached for evolution time T = O γ12 where γ is the minimum gap (except for pathological
cases 291 ). This is a so-called adiabatic regime where the evolved state has support at least

1 − O T1 on the ground state 292 . A number of strategies can be used to increase the
support, see Wiebe and Babcock 293 , Lidar et al. 294 , Kieferová and Wiebe 295 . Roland and
Cerf 296 proposed a method for reaching the adiabatic regime faster by modifying the speed of
Hamiltonian change throughout the evolution. Note that it is not always necessary to reach
the adiabatic regime to achieve a significant overlap with the ground state. Symmetries in
the spectrum can be exploited even when the gap is exponentially small 297 . Crosson et al. 298
demonstrated that this effect is common even for instances that do not exhibit noticeable
symmetries. Standard quantum chemistry methods can be used to lower-bound this gap 45
even though exactly computing it can be demanding.
In Section 5 we will discuss several other state preparation methods for second quantization which have been introduced for the purpose of the variational quantum eigensolver
algorithm, but which also apply to the quantum phase estimation algorithm.
Another possibility is to initialize the registers to approximate a thermal state 45 . While
creating a thermal state is a computationally difficult problem by itself, an approximation
may suffice. Several quantum algorithms can be used for accomplishing this task 241,266,299 .
4.2.2

Hamiltonian simulation for quantum chemistry

Independently of Lloyd’s quantum simulation algorithm 37 , Zalka 273 introduced a quantum
algorithm for simulation of single- and many-body quantum systems. Zalka suggested that
a wave function can be discretized into an l-bit quantum register. The Green’s function for

65

a quantum particle is then approximated by a product of exponentials with potential and
kinetic energy in the exponents. The term corresponding to potential energy is diagonal
and thus relatively straightforward to simulate. Kinetic energy terms can be diagonalized
using the quantum Fourier transform. Zalka proposed to take similar steps for simulating
many-body systems and field theories. Similar ideas also appear in Wiesner 40 .
At the same time, Abrams and Lloyd 99 discussed the subject of Hamiltonian simulation
in first and second quantization in detail using Trotter decompositions and block diagonalization. They pointed out that the Hamiltonian can be expressed more easily in first
quantization but the basis set necessary for expressing the quantum state is smaller in second quantization.
Aspuru-Guzik et al. 45 first realized that quantum computers can be used for determining
ground-state energies. This work lays the grounds for further research in quantum simulations for quantum chemistry, discussing choices of chemical basis, Hamiltonian mapping,
simulation, and energy estimation. To map a many-body system onto a discretized Hamiltonian, one needs to make several choices.
First, one must choose how to map the physical Hamiltonian onto the qubits. The
upshot is that the additional structure in these Hamiltonians can be exploited to improve
the performance over general algorithms. Such improvements should also take constant
overheads into account, which are necessary for determining the feasibility of running a
useful instance of a problem.
Second, in traditional quantum chemistry, it is standard to make several simplifications to
the Hamiltonian which yield a finite-dimensional operator that can be handled more easily.
The Born-Oppenheimer approximation allows one to freeze out the slow-moving ionic degrees
of freedom, leaving only the important electronic degrees of freedom. Up to a few exceptions,
most quantum algorithms work with this approximation.
Third, one needs to make a choice between first and the second quantization. Classical
methods for simulating evolution in the first quantization are relatively rare because of the

66

difficulty of storing the wave function.
Last, one needs to find a suitable basis. The most common choice of basis considered so
far are the Gaussian basis sets of Pople quantum chemistry 300 , for example the STO-nG basis
set 192 . The plane wave basis was long seen as unsuitable because of the high number of orbitals required for approximating a wave function but provides a much simpler representation
of the Hamiltonian. However, the recent improvement in the scaling in the number of basis
terms may make it a front-runner for quantum chemistry quantum algorithms 198,281,301,302 .
Babbush et al. 301 showed that the electronic structure Hamiltonian requires only O(N 2 )
terms in a plane wave basis while O(N 4 ) terms are necessary for Gaussians. Kivlichan et
al. further refined this to show that single Trotter steps of the electronic structure Hamiltonian can be simulated in O(N ) depth with only nearest-neighbor connectivity on a line 302 .
White 303 proposed a so-called Gausslet set that combines Gaussian with wavelet features.
The number of choices led to several avenues of research. In second quantization, Whitfield et al. 186 used the Jordan-Wigner transform to create a local Hamiltonian and gave
explicit formulas to compute the matrix elements. Their algorithm is then applied to H2 ,
decomposing the operations into elementary gates and simulating their quantum algorithm.
A similarly detailed study for LiH with quantum error correction was performed by Jones
et al. 304 .
Simulations in real space have also been proposed 75 . Building on the work of Zalka 41 and
Wiesner 40 , they use the QFT to simulate the kinetic term in the Hamiltonian but implement
the gate sequence and give complexity estimates for their algorithm.
Toloui and Love 254 chose a different approach and used sparse matrix simulation techniques to evolve a state under the configuration interaction matrix. The representation of
the Hamiltonian in the basis of Slater determinants (the configuration interaction matrix) is
sparse and therefore techniques from Section 4.1 can be used for simulation. This technique
is also more space efficient compared to second quantized techniques using Fock states.
While the above algorithms are efficient in terms of asymptotic scaling, their practicality

67

for modest-sized quantum computers remained unclear. The advent of quantum simulators
brought a number of landmark resource estimate studies 48,186,305 . Wecker et al. 47 investigated
the quantum computational resources needed to simulate a molecular Hamiltonian with twice
the number of orbitals that can be handled with classical methods. They paint an ambivalent
picture for the future of Hamiltonian simulation in chemistry. The pessimistic conclusion
was that, while the required spatial resources (i.e. the number of qubits) were just an order
of magnitude more than current devices, the required time resources demanded a quantum
computer whose coherence time was many orders of magnitude beyond the capabilities of
current devices. The algorithm used in their analysis was a “naive Trotter decomposition”,
similar to the proposal of Aspuru-Guzik et al. 45 , which gives a gate count scaling of O(N 11 ),
and an empirical scaling of O(N 9 ). The optimistic conclusion of this work, however, was
that, through improving quantum algorithms for Hamiltonian simulation, these required
time resources could be drastically reduced.
The following years saw a sequence of developments 48,49,306 in analyzing and improving
the asymptotic scaling of resources needed for performing quantum chemical simulations on
a quantum computer, in terms of the numbers of electrons and spin-orbitals. This work
drastically reduced the requirements originally estimated by Wecker et al. 47 .
A series of papers showed how to merge sequential Jordan-Wigner strings to reduce their
cost from linear to constant as well how to parallelize evolution under different terms in
the Hamiltonian 48 . Poulin et al. 49 empirically studied the cost of simulation for real-world
molecules, finding that the cost was closer to O(∼ N 6 ). Later, it was also demonstrated
that the Trotter errors depend on the maximum nuclear charge rather than the number of
spin-orbitals 50 . Subsequently, Reiher et al. 305 carried out a detailed study of the computational cost, including the number of costly gates for quantum error correction, for FeMoCo,
a model of the nitrogenase enzyme that suggests that it is indeed feasible to employ future error-corrected architectures for the simulation of realistic chemical systems of scientific and industrial interest using Trotter-based approaches. The gate counts were further

68

lowered thanks to advancements in circuit synthesis 76,281,302,307,308 and Hamiltonian simulations 188,189,197,266,270 .
Application of LCU techniques 188 in second quantization were studied by Babbush et al. 192
and first quantization by Babbush et al. 191 . These techniques exponentially increased the
precision Hamiltonian simulation. In second quantization, the number of gates required is
Õ(N 5 ). In first quantization, it is Õ(η 2 N 3 ), where η is the number of particles in the system.
Importantly, these early LCU-based algorithms have been shown to scale better asymptotically as a function of molecule size than prior Trotter algorithms for quantum simulation.
The same scaling holds for the qubitization paradigm with better constant factors 189 .
Concepts such as wave function locality 306 can be introduced to further reduce the cost in
terms of quantum gates for molecular simulation. The combination of these ideas with sparse
algorithms and an intelligent choice of basis functions has been shown to reduce the cost of
quantum simulation of chemical systems, but further improvements and generalizations may
yet be possible. There are several ideas from the domain of classical molecular electronic
structure that can be applied in the field of quantum simulation for further reduction of
quantum computational cost.
Recently work has studied the chemistry simulation problem in bases where the Coulomb
operator is diagonal 301,302 . This allows a representation of the chemistry Hamiltonian with a
number of terms scaling quadratically in the number of spin-orbitals, a significant reduction
on the number of terms in the Hamiltonian when using molecular orbitals. This representation was first used to construct Trotter steps of the chemistry Hamiltonian requiring only
a grid of qubits with nearest-neighbor connectivity 301 . Following this, it was shown that
Trotter steps exactly N layers of gates deep (with N the number of spin-orbitals) could be
performed even with the restriction of the qubits being on a line 302 .
This has led to particularly efficient simulation algorithms. For real state simulations,
Kivlichan et al. 76 simulated interacting particles and achieved super-polynomially higher
accuracy than previous algorithms. Kivlichan et al. 302 gave an algorithm linear in depth and

69

quadratic in the number of two-qubit gates in term of spin-orbitals. Soon after, Babbush
et al. 281 gave an algorithm which has been fully priced to the level of fault-tolerant gates.
This algorithm uses quantum signal processing and qubitization to achieve T complexity
O (N + log 1/) for Hamiltonian simulation and O (N 3 / + N 2 log 1/) for energy estimation.
The most recent series of improvements in asymptotic scaling was by Low and Wiebe 197
for second and Babbush et al. 198 for first quantization. Both results use interaction picture
simulations 197 and plane wave basis and achieve O(N 11/3 ) and O(η log N ) complexities.
Researchers have also considered extending the use of quantum algorithms in exploring
non-traditional regimes in quantum chemistry such as relativistic dynamics 309,310 and quantum dynamics beyond the Born-Oppenheimer approximation 75,76,311 . As reliable quantum
computers begin to come online, there will be a continued demand for improvement of these
quantum algorithms.
We give a brief overview of simulation techniques used in quantum chemistry with corresponding Hamiltonian simulation algorithms in Figure 5. A summary of query complexity
and T-counts for a majority of these algorithms can be found in Babbush et al. 281 .
4.2.3

Measuring properties of many-body systems

The last step of quantum chemistry algorithms is extracting information about the system
from the wave function. Such information includes the ground state energy, scattering amplitudes, electronic charge density or k-particle correlations 38 . In principle, it is possible
to estimate any physical quantity or observable that can be expressed through a low-depth
quantum circuit and single-qubit measurements.
The most sought-for information in these algorithms is the ground state energy. Zalka 41
sketched a method for preparing a known quantum state and introduced the “von Neumann
trick” for extracting properties from the prepared wave function. Lidar and Wang 44 then
applied these techniques to develop an algorithm for determining the thermal rate constant
of a chemical reaction. Soon after, Abrams and Lloyd 38 further developed these techniques

70

Product formulas
1996
Lloyd 37
2001
Dodd et al. 251
2002
Nielsen et al. 252
2003 Aharonov and Ta-Shma 253
2007
Berry et al. 260
2010
Childs and Kothari 257
2011
Wiebe et al. 270
2012
Raeisi et al. 312

Quantum walks
2010
2011

Childs 262
Berry and Childs 313

Linear combinations of unitaries
2012
2013
2015
2015
2017

Childs and Wiebe 256
Berry et al. 187
Berry et al. 314
Berry et al. 188
Novo and Berry 315

Signal processing & qubitization
2016
2017
2018

Low and Chuang 189
Low and Chuang 190
Gilyén et al. 266

Composite algorithms
2018
2018

Low and Wiebe 197
Low 265

1996

Zalka 41

1996

Wiesner 40

1997

Abrams and Lloyd 99

2005

Aspuru-Guzik et al. 45
Kassal et al. 75

2009
2010

Whitfield et al. 186

2013

Toloui and Love 254

2013

Wecker et al. 47

2014

McClean et al. 306

2014

Hastings et al. 48

2014

Poulin et al. 49

2014

Babbush et al. 50

2015

Babbush et al. 191

2016

Babbush et al. 192

2017

Babbush et al. 301

2017

Kivlichan et al. 76

2018

Kivlichan et al. 302

2018

Low and Wiebe 197

2018

Babbush et al. 281

2018

Babbush et al. 198

Figure 5: Chronological overview of quantum chemistry simulation algorithms. On the
left-hand side we list quantum simulation algorithm grouped by the techniques they use.
The right-hand side outlines the improvement for time evolution in quantum chemistry. We
indicate the underlying simulation technique with an arrow from the left column to the right.
Furthermore, we color-code the Hamiltonian representation – yellow (lighter color) for first
quantization and red (darker color) for second quantization.
71

to specifically apply them towards calculating static properties of a quantum system. In
2005, Aspuru-Guzik et al. 45 adapted these techniques for the electronic structure problem.
This allowed the number of qubits in the QPEA ancilla register to be reduced from 20 to
4, enabling the study of quantum algorithms for electronic structure problems on a classical
computer 45 . This work shows that even with modest quantum computers of 30-100 errorcorrected qubits, ground state energy calculations of H2 O and LiH could be carried out to
an accuracy beyond that of classical computers. The essential algorithm underlying this
approach is quantum phase estimation and its modifications (see Section 4.1.2).
An iterative version of QPEA for ground state estimation was recently introduced by
Berry et al. 279 . The authors assume that there is an upper bound on the ground state
energy, say from a classical variational method, that is guaranteed to be lower than the
energy of the first excited state. Given this assumption, one can perform QPEA gradually,
measuring the ancilla qubits sequentially instead of postponing the measurement to the end
of the circuit. If the outcome of the QPEA is likely to be a state above this threshold, i.e.
not the ground state, it is possible to abort phase estimation and restart the algorithm.
QPEA can be also used for estimating the energies of excited states. In the simplest
setting, one can use a state that is not an energy eigenstate and use it to sample multiple energies from the spectrum of the Hamiltonian. Santagati et al. 316 introduced a more
sophisticated technique for approximating excited state energies.
A quantum algorithm for ground state energy estimation (as discussed here) requires
techniques from state preparation (Section 4.2.1) and as a subroutine simulation (Section
4.2.2). Combining the recent development all these areas, Babbush et al. 281 give detailed
resource estimates, or “pricing”, for classically intractable ground state energy calculations of
diamond, graphite, silicon, metallic lithium, and crystalline lithium hydride. Incorporating
state-of-the-art error correction methods, they show that the estimates for the number of
gates (which is dominated by the number of T -gates) required to estimate the ground state
energy of FeMoCo is millions of times smaller than the number needed in the methods used

72

earlier 305 .
Without access to fault-tolerant quantum computers, only proof-of-principle quantum
chemistry calculations have been demonstrated. In particular, few-qubit simulations, often
without error correction, have been carried out in most major architectures used for quantum
information. In 2010, Lanyon et al. 234 demonstrated the use of the IPEA to measure the
energy of molecular wave functions. In this case, the wave function of molecular hydrogen
(H2 ) in a minimal basis set was encoded in a one-qubit state and the IPEA was realized
using a two-qubit photonic chip, calculating the molecular hydrogen spectrum to 20 bits of
precision. A similar procedure was applied to H2 using nuclear magnetic resonance Lanyon
et al. 234 , Du et al. 235 , Dolde et al. 236 and to helium hydride (HeH+ ) using nitrogen vacancies
in diamond 236 .
Although these proof-of-principle experiments are groundbreaking, it is not clear how to
scale them because of their reliance on Hamiltonians simplifications and tomography. The
first scalable demonstration of the IPEA (and the variational quantum eigensolver algorithm,
as discussed in Section 5) employed three superconducting qubits for simulating H2 in a
minimal basis and was carried out by a Google Research and Harvard collaboration 55 . We
will explain hybrid quantum-classical algorithms better suitable for these devices in the next
section.

4.3

Chapter 4 Glossary

N

Number of quantum systems, number of qubits, number of orbitals

O(·)

Big-O notation

H

Hamiltonian

e−iHt

Hamiltonian evolution

U (t)

Unitary dynamics

`

Number of k-body interactions

k

Support size of largest Hamiltonian term
73

τ

||H||t



Error

poly(·)

Polynomial function of order ·

d

Sparsity of Hamiltonian

η

Number of particles in system

λm

Eigenenergy

T

Number of ancillary qubits

|ψm i

Eigenstate

|φi

State prepared for phase estimation

f

(Sect. 4.0) Oracular function

f

(Sect. 4.1.2) invertible function used in generalization of PEA

Rk

Rotation gate

n

Number of qubits

QPEA

Quantum phase estimation algorithm

RAM

Random access memory

IPEA

Iterative phase estimation algorithm

ASP

Adiabatic state preparation

MCSCF

Multi-configurational self-consistent field

QFT

Quantum Fourier transform

5

Quantum algorithms for noisy intermediate-scale quantum devices

Despite recent improvements in the resource estimates for fully-quantum chemistry algorithms such as the quantum phase estimation, the number of gates and circuit depth required
for their implementation surpasses the capabilities of existing and near-term quantum devices. Furthermore, these early devices, also called “pre-threshold” or NISQ 51 devices, can74

not support quantum error correction schemes, which require additional overhead. Such
limitations have motivated the development of quantum algorithms that assume the use
of an imperfect, noisy quantum computer that can still outperform classical algorithms at
providing approximate solutions to relevant problems.
An algorithm for a NISQ device requires a low circuit depth that allows for execution
within the limited coherence time of the device. Additionally, the quantity of interest should
be easy to extract from direct measurements of the quantum states prepared in the device.
To make NISQ algorithms as efficient as possible, one can allocate computational tasks
between quantum and classical devices based on the inherent advantages of each device.
These observations led to the rise of hybrid quantum-classical (HQC) algorithms, which
leverage strengths of quantum and classical computation, utilizing each where appropriate.

Figure 6: Outline of the hybrid quantum-classical (HQC) framework. The first part of the
algorithm is performed as a quantum circuit on quantum hardware going from an input state
to an output state. After measurement the data is passed on to a classical computer where
the parameter optimization of the quantum circuit happens. This process allows one to take
advantage of the strengths of present-day hardware and to avoid some of the weaknesses.
The general layout of HQC algorithms, as illustrated in Figure 6, comprises of three steps.
The first is state preparation, achieved by application of a sequence of parametrized quantum
gates on an initial state. The second step is measurement, in which the value of the objective
function is estimated from measurements performed on the prepared quantum state. The

75

third step involves feedback or optimization on the classical computer to determine new
parameters to improve the quality of the state.
While the algorithms developed within this framework can be implemented on faulttolerant quantum computers, their original intent is to be implemented on NISQ devices.
One particular challenge of this implementation is the presence of errors in the machine,
which impacts the quality of the observables measured on the device. While some HQC
algorithms have shown robustness against certain types of errors, specific techniques to
mitigate noise on NISQ devices have been proposed and started to be incorporated into the
implementations of HQC algorithms 317–319 .
In this chapter, we will discuss some of the HQC algorithms developed for the simulation
of quantum chemistry. See Figure 1 for its connection with previous sections. Specifically,
Section 5.1 describes the variational quantum eigensolver (VQE) approach 52,320 , the first example of an HQC algorithm to be proposed. VQE applies the time-independent variational
principle to optimize the parameters of a quantum circuit implementing an ansatz on the
quantum computer. This method provides approximate solutions to the time-independent
Schrödinger equation. Section 5.2 describes the variational quantum simulation (VQS) algorithm, which is analogous to VQE for finding approximate solutions to the time-dynamics
of the Schrödinger equation by applying one formulation of the time-dependent variational
principle and other variations of these algorithms for the static problem. Finally, Section 5.3
covers algorithms for quantum chemistry simulation developed for non-gate-based near-term
quantum devices, which includes devices for adiabatic quantum computing and linear optics.

5.1

Variational quantum eigensolver (VQE) algorithm

The VQE algorithm is an application of the time-independent variational principle, where
the wave function ansatz preparation and energy estimation are both implemented on a
quantum device. This paradigm allows for much flexibility in practice because the ansatz
can be chosen to take into account the specifications of the quantum hardware. Furthermore,
76

Figure 7: Illustration of the VQE algorithm. Traditionally, the quantum computer is used
to prepare a set of parametrized quantum states followed by applications of rotations Ri ∈
{I, RX (−π/2), RY (π/2)} depending on the Pauli term of the Hamiltonian to be measured.
The classical computer then takes the individual estimates of the Pauli term expectation
~ and averages them to compute a single value Ē(θ).
~ This cost function value
values hPi (θ)i
is fed into an optimization routine, which produces an updated set of parameters θ~ as input
for the quantum circuit in the next optimization loop. This procedure is repeated until
the energy converges. We note that recent and future efforts are to improve each VQE
component as well as replace certain “classical” subroutines with quantum counterparts to
further leverage the capabilities of quantum computers.

77

the energy estimation for VQE is performed by a technique called Hamiltonian averaging,
described below, that exchanges coherence time with the ability to sample the quantum
computer multiple times. These two aspects make VQE a good candidate to simulate the
ground states of quantum systems using current and near-term quantum devices. The core
of the algorithm can be broken down into the following steps:
E
~ is prepared on the quantum
1. State Preparation: A parametrized quantum state Ψ(θ)
device. This is achieved by applying a parametrized unitary to an easy-to-prepare initial
E
~ |Ψ0 i = Ψ(θ)
~ . The parametrized
state |Ψ0 i (e.g. a computational basis state): U (θ)
unitary is defined by the choice of ansatz, which should correspond to a family of states
that cannot be efficiently represented and manipulated on a classical computer;
~ is estimated using
2. Energy Estimation: The expectation value of the energy hHi (θ)
a Hamiltonian averaging procedure, which involves taking measurements of tensor
products of Pauli terms corresponding to the qubit representation of the target Hamiltonian 216 ;
3. Classical Feedback: The parameters θ~ of the quantum state are updated using a classical non-linear optimization routine;
4. Steps 2 and 3 are repeated until convergence criteria (e.g. energy) are satisfied.
The basic framework of VQE is modular in design such that various types of extensions
and improvements are possible. In the following subsections, we describe each VQE step in
greater detail, outlining improvements as well as open questions pertaining to the particular
step.
5.1.1

Ansatze for state preparation

The flexibility of the VQE algorithm arises from the ability to choose the parametrized trial
state used to approximate the eigenstates of the target Hamiltonian. Consequently, the
78

performance of the algorithm depends largely on the quality and structure of this ansatz. In
general, the construction of the ansatz involves preparing an initial state and building upon
it using a parametrized quantum circuit, as shown in Figure 7.
Intuitively, a well-chosen ansatz can dramatically improve the capabilities of the classical
optimization in the VQE algorithm. One aspect of this intuition was recently formalized by
McClean et al. 321 . The authors show that, for sufficiently random circuits, the variational
parameter landscape is plagued by the overabundance of “barren plateaus”, large regions
in which the cost function gradient is nearly zero. This implies that using arbitrary or
unstructured ansatze will lead to poor convergence of the optimization routine. This issue can
be circumvented by using physically motivated ansatze that have measurable gradients and
thus better guide the optimizer. Another important quality of a circuit ansatz, particularly
important for NISQ devices, is the ability to implement it with a high-fidelity, low-depth
circuit.
The two broad strategies in circuit ansatz design account for these considerations to
different extents. They are
1. physically-motivated ansatze (PMA), which are methods based on or inspired by numerical techniques that systematically approximate the exact electronic wave function;
2. hardware heuristic ansatze (HHA), which correspond to parametrized circuits comprising single-qubit rotations and entangling blocks generally chosen to take advantage of
specific quantum hardware capabilities.
The prototypical example of the PMA category is the Unitary Coupled Cluster (UCC)
ansatz, which consists of a systematic expansion that approximates the exact many-electron
wave function as the excitation rank of the operators in the cluster operator increases. While
the UCC ansatz is intractable to express with a classical computer 322–324 , a Trotter-Suzuki
decomposition approximation (c.f. Section 2.3) of this transformation can be implemented
efficiently on a quantum computer 52,320 . The relatively large number of parameters and
79

long circuit depth required to implement UCC motivated the development of alternative
approaches. In particular, Wecker et al. proposed a Hamiltonian variational ansatz approach 325 , which consists of a parametrized version of the circuit implementing Hamiltonian
simulation for the target Hamiltonian. This approach allows for a reduction in the number
of variational parameters, however, the depth of the circuit depends on the complexity of the
target Hamiltonian. When combined with the simplified representations of the Hamiltonian
described in the previous section 301 , the Hamiltonian variational method can be used to construct variational circuits with depth equal to the number of spin-orbitals for a linear qubit
architecture, using the fermionic swap network 302 . Independently, Dallaire-Demers et al. 326
proposed a related PMA ansatz with the same scaling in depth based on a circuit employed
to prepare fermionic Gaussian states (FGSs) on a quantum register, called the low-depth
circuit ansatz (LDCA). The LDCA comprises parallel layers of nearest-neighbor matchgates
augmented by ZZ interactions.
On the other hand, HHA approaches have been mainly motivated by limitations of existing quantum hardware. The general structure of the quantum circuits employed as HHA
comprises two interleaved blocks: the first one comprising single-qubit rotations and the
second one composed of fixed entangling operations that can be easily executed when taking
into account particular constraints of the quantum hardware employed 56 . This concept was
applied in the experimental demonstration of the VQE protocol for small molecules 56 , and
it has been recently refined using sets of gates that conserve particle number 327 . Although
these approaches can be implemented more easily than existing PMA on NISQ devices, to
date, there lacks theoretical evidence one way or the other regarding their ability to efficiently
approximate many-electron wave functions.
Evidently, significant progress has been made in the development and design of ansatze.
However the existence of a general formulation to construct meaningful ansatze for particular
target Hamiltonians remains an open question. In what follows we describe in more detail
some of the ansatzes outlined above.

80

Unitary Coupled Cluster. Traditional coupled-cluster (CC) methods have long been
considered the “gold standard” of quantum chemistry because they offer chemically accurate
results for a variety of systems, including molecules near equilibrium, and because they are
tractable on classical computers.
Recall that the ansatz for the traditional coupled-cluster method can be written as
|ΨCC i = eT |Φ0 i ,

(31)

where |Φ0 i is a reference state, usually the solution to the Hartree-Fock equations, and T
corresponds to excitation operators of different excitation rank defined in terms of fermionic
annihilation and creation operators as

T =

η
X

Ti

(32)

i=1

T1 =

X

tia a†a ai

(33)

i∈occ
a∈virt

X

T2 =

† †
tij
ab aa ab ai aj

(34)

i>j∈occ
a>b∈virt

...,

where the occ and virt spaces are defined as the occupied and unoccupied sites in the reference
state and η is the number of electrons in the system. For practical implementations on
classical computers, T is usually truncated to lower excitation excitation ranks e.g. single (T1 )
and double (T2 ) excitations. This allows one to find optimal CC amplitudes by projecting
the Schrödinger equation in the form
e−T HeT |Φ0 i = ECC |Φ0 i

81

(35)

against a set of configurations {hµ|}. This set spans the space of all the states that can be
reached by applying the truncated cluster operator T linearly to the reference state. The
similarity-transformed Hamiltonian, e−T HeT can be expanded using the Baker-CampbellHausdorff (BCH) formula. The expansion applied to Equation 35 has a finite truncation
leading to a finite set of non-linear equations for the CC energy and amplitudes. These
equations are then solved using standard numerical methods such as Newton’s approach 79 . A
method such as CCSD(T) (where the effect of triple excitations is included using perturbation
theory) suffices to achieve chemical accuracy for energies of molecules near equilibrium.
Unfortunately the scaling of this approach, O(N 7 ), limits its applicability to small molecules.
Unitary coupled-cluster (UCC) is an alternative CC formulation constructed as
†

|ΨU CC i = eT −T |Φ0 i ,

(36)

where the T operator is replaced by the anti-Hermitian operator T − T † . Consequently the
corresponding CC operator is unitary and the formulation is variational, which offers an
advantage compared to standard CC. However, UCC is not a practical ansatz in classical
quantum chemistry because the BCH expansion of the similarity transformed Hamiltonian,
†

†

†

e−(T −T ) HeT −T , does not terminate 324 . Fortunately, unitary operations such as eT −T are
natural operations on quantum computers. They can be readily implementing by mapping
fermionic excitation operators to qubit operators and applying the Trotter-Suzuki decomposition to the cluster operator. The different Trotter approximations to the UCC operator
constitute a family of CC-inspired ansatze that can be implemented on a quantum computer
using standard circuit compilation techniques for exponentiating Pauli matrices 1 . Given the
inherent advantage in implementing the ansatz as well as the high accuracies of CC methods,
the application of the UCC ansatz truncated up to single and double excitations (UCCSD)
has been investigated both theoretically and experimentally 52,53,59,325–330 .
In the case of a Trotterized implementation of UCCSD, the ansatz parameters correspond

82

to the cluster amplitudes, whose number scales as O(N 2 η 2 ) < O(N 4 ). Correspondingly,
a serial implementation of these terms would result in a scaling of the number of gates
of O(f N 4 ), where f indicates the number of gates required for implementing each term.
The scaling of f with N depends on the fermion-to-qubit mapping employed: in the case
of the Bravyi-Kitaev transformation f ∈ O(log(N )) while in the case of Jordan-Wigner
f ∈ O(N ) (see Appendix B). Similarly, the circuit depth can be upper-bounded to O(f N 4 ),
which corresponds to a serial execution, however this can be improved depending on the
connectivity constraints of the hardware and the ability to parallelize operations in the
quantum registers. For architectures with arbitrary connectivity that allow parallelization,
some strategies developed for Trotterized Hamiltonian evolution 49 could save up to a linear
factor in depth using a constant number of ancilla qubits when a Jordan-Wigner mapping is
used.
The scaling in the number of parameters of the UCCSD ansatz poses a challenge for
typical optimization strategies, as the number of amplitudes can easily increase to the order of thousands for systems with tens of spin-orbitals and half filling. To reduce this cost,
practical applications of UCCSD must consider typical strategies employed in classical quantum chemistry to prioritize those excitation operators that are more relevant for achieving
accuracy. Some of these strategies include: limiting the calculation to active spaces, freezing core orbitals, applying spin-symmetry constraints and discarding operators with low
amplitudes based on classical efficient approximations e.g. Møller-Plesset perturbation theory 216,327,329 . The last strategy also has the potential to significantly reduce the number of
gates required and provides approximate amplitudes for initializing the optimization, which
has been pointed out as critical for improving convergence 329 .
Most numerical demonstrations of UCCSD applied to VQE have explored the impact of
different optimization approaches, including both gradient-free and gradient-based methods,
as described in more detail in Section 5.1.3. In practice, gradient-based methods can be
implemented using either numerical or analytical gradients. It has been pointed out that

83

analytical gradients require orders-of-magnitude fewer measurements than numerical gradients 329 . The effect of the number of Trotter steps has been also investigated, indicating that
the accuracy of the exact implementation of the UCCSD exponential operator is virtually
the same as the one obtained with Trotterized UCCSD for different Trotter numbers. This
can be understood considering that different Trotterized versions of UCCSD correspond to
different ansatze and the variational optimization tends to compensate the differences between the non-Trotterized and the Trotterized version, which would have different optimal
amplitudes. UCCSD has been implemented in combination with different basis set representations of the chemistry Hamiltonian, including the particle/hole basis 327 and the Bogoliubov
basis 326 . The latter allows for the application of UCC to Hamiltonians with pairing fields,
extending the range of applicability of VQE to problems in condensed matter and nuclear
physics. Finally, UCCSD has been demonstrated experimentally for HeH+ using a single
trapped ion 53 , for H2 on a superconducting quantum computer 55 , for H2 and LiH on an
ion-trapped quantum computer 59 and for the wave function of a deuterium nucleus using
cloud quantum computing 330 .

Hamiltonian variational ansatze. The Hamiltonian variational approach, proposed by
Wecker et al. 47 , defines a strategy for building variational ansatze for arbitrary Hamiltonians.
The general idea is described as follows: consider a target Hamiltonian that can be written
P
as a sum of local terms, H =
i hi Oi , where hi is a scalar and Oi is a local operator.
Furthermore, the terms in this Hamiltonian can be grouped into arbitrary subsets, H =
P
j Hj . The criteria for grouping can differ depending on the target Hamiltonian as shown
below. The variational ansatz is defined as

|Ψ(θ)i =

!
S
Y


UHj (θjb )...UH1 (θ1b ) |Ψ0 i ,

(37)

b=1

where |Ψ0 i can be chosen to match the desired symmetry properties of the target ground

84


state, UHk (θkb ) = exp θkb Hj , θ is a vector grouping the scalar variational parameters to be
minimized [θ11 , · · · , θkb , · · · , θjS ], and S is the number of repetitions of the circuit block and can
be varied to control the approximation accuracy. Notice that in the implementation, each
term UHk (θkb ) has to be further broken down into a product of exponentials of individuals
terms since Hj may be a sum of terms. If all the terms within a subset were to commute,
this could be implemented exactly. The definition of the circuit in the product of Equation
37 resembles a first order Trotterized evolution under the Hamiltonian, where now the terms
have been multiplied by arbitrary parameters. Other versions of Equation 37 can be obtained
by mimicking higher-order Trotter-Suzuki formulas.
The Hamiltonian variational approach is inspired by both adiabatic state preparation
(ASP) and the quantum approximate optimization algorithm (QAOA) 331,332 . In ASP, the
ground state of a target Hamiltonian, H1 , is obtained by adiabatically evolving the ground
state of a Hamiltonian H0 , |Ψ0 i, that is easy to prepare. This process assumes that the
transition between H0 and H1 is continuous and that the ground state energy of λH0 + (1 −
λ)H1 remains sufficiently separated from the first excited state energy during the preparation
(see Section 5.3.1 for discussion of the importance of the “energy gap” remaining large). In
practice, ASP is implemented by rotating the initial state by a time-dependent Hamiltonian
of the form H(t) = A(t)H0 + B(t)H1 , where A(t) and B(t) are continuous functions defining
the relative weights between the initial Hamiltonian and the target one, which constitutes
the annealing schedule. This evolution is performed during some annealing time t and
is discretized into S steps of size ∆t = St , such that the annealing becomes a sequence
of S unitary rotations by Hamiltonians interpolating between H0 and H1 . If the initial
and target Hamiltonian are both expressed as a sum over the same Hamiltonian terms,
P
Hi = j hij Oj , then the evolution in Equation 37 can be seen as analogous to a discretized
adiabatic state preparation, where the angles of the rotations are obtained by a variational
optimization instead of being fixed by a predefined annealing schedule. A related idea is
the concept of adiabatically parametrized states, introduced in McClean et al. 216 , where

85

the functions defining the annealing schedule are parametrized and subsequently optimized
using variational minimization.
Wecker et al. 325 also proposed two different optimization strategies for minimizing the
energy of the ansatze defined in Equation 37. The first approach, described as global variational, corresponds to the simultaneous optimization of all the parameters in the ansatz,
given a fixed value of S. The second approach, called annealed variational, is also inspired
by discretized adiabatic state preparation. It consists of performing a block-by-block optimization that starts by optimizing the ansatz with S = 1. The state resulting from this
optimization, Ψ(1) , is used as the initial state for an optimization with another variational
circuit with S = 1, obtaining a new state, Ψ(2) . This process is repeated until S steps
have been completed. The final parameters could be further refined by a global optimization, or at each step k in the sequential optimization a global optimization could be applied.
The block-by-block optimization procedure improves convergence and is analogous to the
segment-by-segment pre-training strategy employed in machine learning to avoid barren
plateaus in the optimization of neural networks 333,334 .
The performance of the Hamiltonian variational approach applied to the Fermi-Hubbard
model in a 2D lattice and the electronic structure Hamiltonian is analyzed in Wecker et al. 325 .
In the first case, the target Hamiltonian has the form

H = −t

X

a†i,σ aj,σ + U

X †
ai,↑ ai,↑ a†i,↓ ai,↓ ,

(38)

i

hi,ji,σ

where a†i,σ and ai,σ respectively create and annihilate an electron at site i with spin σ ∈ {↑, ↓}.
The summation in the first term runs over nearest neighbors, denoted as hi, ji. In this case,
the Hubbard Hamiltonian is divided as H = hh + hv + hU , where hh and hv are the sums of
hopping terms in the horizontal and vertical directions, respectively, and hU is the repulsion

86

term. The authors use a second-order Trotter formula for the Hamiltonian variational ansatz
 b 
 b
S 
Y
θU
σU
†
b
b
|Ψ(θ)i =
Uh (θh )Uv (θv )UU
|Ψ0 i ,
UU −
2
2
b=1

(39)

where UX (θX ) denotes a Trotter approximation to exp(iθX hX ) where X ∈ {U, h, v}. The
initial state |Ψ0 i is chosen to be in the correct spin sector e.g. a computational state with
equal number of spin-up and spin-down qubits for singlet ground states.
For the application to the electronic structure Hamiltonian, the terms are separated into
three groups corresponding to diagonal terms, hopping terms and exchange terms as follows

Hdiag =

XX
p

Hhop =

p a†p ap +

hpq a†p aq +

(40)

X

hprrq a†p aq a†r ar ,

(41)

p,q,r

p,q

X

Hex =

hpqqp a†p ap a†q aq ,

p,q

p

X

X

hpqrs a†p a†q as ar ,

(42)

p,q,r,s

where the sums are taken with p, q, r, s all distinct from one another. In this case the ansatz
is built as:

|Ψ(θ)i =

S
Y
b=1

"
†
Uex



σb
− ex
2



†
Uhop

b
θhop
−
2

!
b
Udiag (θdiag
)Uhop

b
θhop
2

!

 b #
θex
Uex
|Ψ0 i , (43)
2

where UX (θX ) denotes a Trotter approximation to exp(iθX hX ) where X ∈ {ex, hop, diag}.
The initial state is chosen to be the ground state of Hdiag and the basis is a Hartree-Fock
basis such that Hhop |Ψ0 i = 0. Both Equations 39 and 40 were numerically tested on lattices
of size 2 × N with N = 4, 6, 8, 10, 12 and for small molecules such as HeH+ , H2 O, BeH2 , and
hydrogen chains (Hx with x ∈ {6, 8, 10}). The results show that this strategy can achieve
good overlaps with the ground state for values of S varying between 3 and 20 (see Wecker
et al. 325 ). However, it remains to investigate how S would scale with the size of the system
and the accuracy required for generic Hamiltonians.
87

The Hamiltonian variational approach greatly reduces the number of variational parameters, which eases the optimization. In the case of the Hubbard model, it also provides an
ansatz that scales only linearly with the size of the system and therefore is a good candidate for experimental demonstration in near-term devices. However, in the case of quantum
chemistry Hamiltonians, the depth of the corresponding ansatz is directly related to the
number of terms in the Hamiltonian, which scales formally as O(N 4 ). This scaling might
vary depending on the analytical properties of the basis sets employed to represent the
Hamiltonian. In the case of Gaussian-type orbitals (GTOs), which are the most popular
basis sets in quantum chemistry, the number of non-negligible terms scales nearly quadratically for systems of sufficient size, as explained in more detail in Section 5.1.2. The sizes at
which this scaling is observed, however, depends on the nature of the system and the basis
set and might correspond to tens to hundreds of angstroms 79,306 . This fact has motivated
the exploration of alternative basis sets that can show more favorable scalings and therefore
facilitate the computation.
In particular, Babbush et al. have proposed to use a dual form of the plane wave basis 301
which diagonalizes the potential operator, leading to the following representation of the
electronic structure Hamiltonian that has only O(N 2 ) terms:

H=

4π X ζj cos[kν · (Rj − rp0 ]
1 X 2
kν cos[kν · rq0 −p0 ]a†p0 ,σ aq0 ,σ −
np0 ,σ
2N ν,p0 ,q0 ,σ
Ω 0
kν2
p ,σ
j,v6=0

+

=

2π
Ω

X

(p0 ,q 0 )6=(q ,σ )
ν6=0

X
pq

cos[kν · rp0 −q0 ]
np0 ,σ nq0 ,σ0 ,
kν2
0 0

Tpq a†p aq +

X
p

Up np +

X

Vpq np nq

(44)

p6=q

where, np is the number operator, ζj are nuclei charges and kν is a vector of the plane wave
frequencies at the harmonics of the computational cell in three dimensions, with volume
Ω. Here, σ is the spin degree of freedom and ν is a three-dimensional vector of integers

88

with elements in [−N 1/3 , N 1/3 ]. Letter indices with an apostrophe denote orbitals while
regular letters indicate spin-orbitals. The plain wave dual basis set can be viewed as a
discrete variable representation (DVR) and is particularly suited for periodic systems. When
mapped to qubit operators, the Hamiltonian in Equation 44 is equivalent to the following
local Hamiltonian in the Jordan-Wigner representation:

H=

X
p

X Tpq
p6=q

2

Tpq + Up X Vpq
+
2
2
q

!
Zp +

X

Vpq Zp Zq +

p6=q

(Xp Zp+1 . . . Zq−1 Xq + Yp Zp+1 . . . Zq−1 Yq ).

(45)

Notice that this Hamiltonian also encompasses the Fermi-Hubbard Hamiltonian and can
be readily combined with the Hamiltonian variational strategy to produce a variational
ansatz. In Babbush et al. 301 , this idea is developed to propose a VQE simulation for Jellium,
that requires depth O(N · S) and optimizes only over O(N ) parameters by exploiting the
translational invariance of this system.
Finally, Kivlichan et al. 302 demonstrated that a single Trotter step of the Hamiltonian in
Equation 44 can be implemented with a circuit of depth N using a Fermionic Swap Network,
which has a constant improvement with respect to the proposal in Babbush et al. 301 and is
conjectured to be optimal. In the particular case of the Fermi-Hubbard Hamiltonian, the
√
scaling is further reduced to O( N ). The main insight of this proposal is that when the
Jordan-Wigner transformation acts on the terms (a†p aq + a†q ap ), it produces terms of locality
|p − q| + 1, which has significant overhead when mapped to a circuit. To get rid of this
problem, the authors propose to execute the Trotter step by executing operations only on
nearest neighbor qubits, and then swapping the spin-orbital indexes, until all the N (N −1)/2
interactions between spin-orbitals are implemented. The swapping is performed using the
fermionic-SWAP (f-SWAP) gate, defined as
p,q
†
†
†
†
fSW
AP = 1 + ap aq + aq ap − ap aq − aq ap .

89

(46)

Furthermore, rotations by the interaction and repulsion terms between orbitals with indexes p
and q could be implemented together with the f-SWAP gates, forming the so-called fermionic
simulation gate,

 p,q
F (p, q) = exp(−iVpq np nq t) exp −iTpq (a†p aq + a†q ap )t fswap




i
i
≡ exp − Vpq (1 − Zp − Zq − Zp Zq )t exp − Tpq (Xp Xq + Yp Yq )t
4
2
1
× (Xp Xq + Yp Yq + Zp + Zq )
 2

0
0
0 
1


0 −i sin(Tpq t) cos(Tpq t)

0


≡

0 cos(T t) −i sin(T t)
0 


pq
pq


−iVpq t
0
0
0
−e

(47)

(48)

The fermionic swap network circuit could be readily employed in combination with the
Hamiltonian variational strategy to create a variational ansatz for preparing ground states of
the Hamiltonian of Equation 44 using VQE. For example, one could adopt a parametrization
with distinct variables for the interaction and the hopping terms, in analogy with Equation
39. Alternatively, one could free the T and V terms as variational parameters, which scales
as O(N 2 ) compared to O(N 4 ) of the UCCSD ansatz.

Low depth circuit ansatz. Another ansatz for state preparation in VQE is the so-called
low depth circuit ansatz (LDCA) proposed by Dallaire-Demers et al. 326 . This ansatz is
inspired by a circuit for preparing fermionic Gaussian states (FGSs) on quantum computers.
In what follows, we briefly describe FGSs and some of the techniques for preparing these
states in quantum registers before describing the LDCA.
FGSs are states of which the density operators can be expressed as an exponential of a
quadratic function of fermionic creation and annihilation operators. Typical single determinant ansatze such as the Hartree-Fock (HF) and the Bardeen-Cooper-Schreiffer (BCS) states

90

for superconductivity, are FGSs. The advantage of simulating this family of states is that
they are completely characterized by a quadratic number of parameters and therefore, can
be manipulated efficiently on a classical computer. A particularly convenient representation
of an FGS is via its covariance matrix (Γ ), which corresponds to a 2N × 2N matrix
i
Γkl = tr (ρ [γk , γl ]) .
2

(49)

where γj = a†j + aj and γj† = −i(a†j − aj ) correspond to Majorana operators and ρ is the
corresponding FGSs. For pure states iΓ −1 ≤ 0 and Γ 2 = −1. Importantly, any expectation
value of an operator can be computed from the covariance matrix as:


ip tr ργj1 . . . γj2p = Pf Γ |j1 ...,j2p ,

(50)

where 1 ≤ j1 < . . . < j2p ≤ 2N , Γ |j1 ...j2p is the corresponding submatrix of Γ and
Pf (Γ ) =

1
2N N !

P

s∈S2N sgn (s)

QN

j=1 Γs(2j−1),s(2j)

(51)
=

p
det (Γ )

is the Pfaffian of a 2N × 2N matrix defined from the symmetric group S2N and sgn (s) is
the signature of the permutation s. Similarly, the time evolution of a state can also be
described via the covariance matrix. FGSs have special properties, including being ground
P
states of quadratic Hamiltonians of the form H =
pq hpq γp γq . In addition, pure FGSs
Q2N
can be brought into the form |ψi = k=1 (uk + vk a†k a†k )|0i where |vk |2 + |uk |2 = 1, using an
appropriate basis set transformation. Finally, we point out that FGSs also include thermal
states of quadratic fermionic Hamiltonians and in the case where the number of particles is
well-defined, FGSs correspond to Slater determinants.
Preparing FGSs on a quantum computer is often the first step in the quantum simulation
of fermionic Hamiltonians, whether quantum phase estimation or variational schemes such
91

as VQE are employed. Methods for preparing Slater determinants and general FGSs employ
a quadratic number of gates 302,326,335,336 . In the case of Slater determinants, the preparation
is often described in terms of a rotation U applied to a single determinant,
|ψs i = Uc†1 · · · c†N |vaci,

(52)

where c†k and ck represent fermionic operators in an easy to prepare basis (e.g. the computational basis). The transformation U is a 2N × 2N matrix, however it is equivalent to rotating
the basis,

φp =

X

ψq upq ;

a†p =

X

cq u∗pq ;

a†p =

X

(53)

q

q

q

c†q upq ,

where φp , a†p , ap are spin-orbitals and fermionic operators in the rotated basis and u is an
N × N unitary matrix. The operator U is related to u via
!
U = exp

X
pq

upq (a†p aq − ap a†q ) .

(54)

U can be decomposed into a sequence of Givens rotations by applying a QR decomposition
scheme to u, generating a circuit composed of two-qubit gates corresponding to these Givens
rotations applied on neighboring qubits 302,335 .
In the case of FGSs, there exist two related schemes. Jiang et al. 335 proposed a method
that specifies the FGSs as the corresponding quadratic fermionic Hamiltonian for which the
target FGSs are ground states. The Hamiltonian is

H=

N
X
j,k=1

Σjk c†j ck +

N

1 X
∆jk c†j c†k + h.c. ,
2 j,k=1

(55)

where Σ = Σ† and ∆ = −∆† are complex matrices. This Hamiltonian is brought into its

92

diagonal form using standard methods, yielding

H=

X

j b†j bj + C,

(56)

j

where C is a constant and bj and b†j are new fermionic operators. The transformation that
maps the original fermionic operators to the new ones is described by the matrix 2N × 2N
matrix W , defined by
 
 
†
†
b 
c 
=
W
 
 .
b
c

(57)

Using matrix manipulation on W , the corresponding circuit implementing this transformation, W, can be decomposed into a sequence of (N − 1)N/2 Givens rotations applied on
neighboring qubits and N particle-hole transformations implemented as single qubit rotations. This circuit can be parallelized in depth O(N ) 335 .
Independently, Dallaire-Demers et al. 326 proposed a method that prepares FGSs specified
by their corresponding covariance matrix. The prepared state has the form

|Φ0 i = C

M
Y
k=1

bk |vaci ,

(58)

where |vaci is the Fock vacuum and the operators bk and their Hermitian conjugates, b†k ,
correspond to Bogoliubov operators which are defined as in Equation 57 and c†k and ck being
the original fermionic operators with respect to the Fock vacuum. From the covariance
matrix it is possible to obtain the corresponding W matrix, which is later decomposed
into 2N (N − 1) matchgates acting on neighboring qubits and N local rotations, using the
Hoffmann algorithm 337 . The final circuit can be parallelized such that its depth scales only
as O(N ). Notice that both methods 326,335 achieve the same scaling but differ in the types
of gates and the numerical methods employed to compute the angles of the preparation

93

circuits. While the other linear-depth methods have better constant factors, their circuits
are less general 302,326,335 .
The circuit requires a single layer of single qubit rotations followed by blocks of neigh(k)

boring matchgates, Gij , acting on qubits i and j. The matchgates can be decomposed into
a product of two-qubit evolutions under XX, XY , Y X, and Y Y , with the evolution times
obtainable from the covariance matrix. Each parallel cycle of the LDCA circuit interleaves
gates between even and odd neighboring qubits,
(k)

UMG =

Y

(k)

Gi,i+1

N 
2

(k)

Gi,i+1 .

(59)

i∈even

i∈odd

There are

Y

cycles in total, i.e.

NN
UMG
=

M
dY
2 e

(k)

UMG ,

(60)

k=1

such that the transformation W can be composed as

NN
W = UMG

M
Y

RiZ .

(61)

i=1

Dallaire-Demers et al. 326 suggest that a similar circuit template could be used to create a
variational ansatz by complementing the list of matchgates with neighboring ZZ interactions,
allowing for the preparation of non-Gaussian fermionic states. A similar idea has been used to
design ansatze for preparing non-Gaussian states efficiently on classical computers, with high
success 338 . The so-called low depth circuit ansatz (LDCA), acts on the quasiparticle vacuum
state for the Bogoliubov picture, such that the initial states correspond to the generalized
Hartree-Fock optimal state for the VQE target Hamiltonian. The circuit comprises L cycles
of variational blocks composed of the simulation gates Kij , where each Kij is a product of
evolutions under Y X, XY , ZZ, Y Y , and XX with the evolution times again given by the
covariance matrix.
94

Each layer k applies variational rotations in parallel, first on the even pairs and then on
the odd pairs such that
(k,l)
UVarMG

(k,l)

Θ



=

Y

(k,l)
Ki,i+1



(k,l)
Θi,i+1



i∈odd

A cycle l is composed of

N 
2

×

Y

(k,l)
Ki,i+1



(k,l)
Θi,i+1



.

(62)

i∈even

layers, in analogy with the FGSs preparation:

d N2
Ye (k,l)


NN(l)
(l)
UVarMG Θ
=
UVarMG Θ(k,l) .

(63)

k=1

Finally, the L cycles are assembled sequentially to form the complete variational ansatz

UVarMG (Θ) =

L
Y

NN(l)

UVarMG Θ(l)

M
Y


RiZ θiZ ,

(64)

i=1

l=1

with only one round of variational phase rotations

Z i
RiZ θiZ = eiθi σz .

(65)

The variational state therefore has the form
†
|Ψ (Θ)i = UBog
UVarMG (Θ)

N
Y
i=1

Xi |0i⊗M ,

(66)

where UBog is the W transformation corresponding to the optimal Bogoliubov transformation
for the VQE target Hamiltonian, which can be included if measuring the Hamiltonian is more
(k,l)

efficient in the original basis. There are 5 variational angles per Kij and N − 1 of those
 
 
terms per layer. Since each cycle has N2 layers, an L-cycle circuit has 5L (N − 1) N2 +
N variational angles, the extra term arising from the round of Z rotations. Considering
 
†
parallelization, the final circuit depth is (10L + 8) N2 + 4 when we account for UBog
and
the initial round of single-qubit X gates.

95

The linear scaling of the depth of LDCA makes it a viable option for implementation on
near-term NISQ devices. The same global variational and annealed variational optimization
approaches employed in the optimization of Hamiltonian variational approaches can be applied in this case. The LDCA also has the advantage of being able to treat systems where
the number of particles is not conserved, such as superconductors, and therefore expands the
range of applications of VQE to problems in condensed matter physics. For the same reason,
the optimization of the energy must be performed by constraining the number of particles
in those cases where the number of particles is conserved, e.g. in molecular systems. Numerical studies of LDCA have shown great promise. In the original paper 326 , the authors
applied LDCA to a system with 8 qubits, corresponding to a 2 × 2 Fermi-Hubbard lattice
and an extended Fermi-Hubbard model describing the isomerization of cyclobutadiene. The
results demonstrated the ability of LDCA to describe the ground states of these systems in
both weakly-correlated and strongly-correlated regimes. More recently, the LDCA has been
applied to lithium hydride 339 , showing superior accuracy compared to hardware efficient
ansatze. Still, further numerical benchmarks and theoretical analysis are required to better
understand the scaling of the number of layers with the accuracy of the ansatz.
Finally, we point out that approaches analogous to LDCA could be developed by interleaving the blocks of Givens rotations obtained in the procedure proposed by Jiang et al. 335 ,
with ZZ interactions and optimizing the parameters in the Givens rotations variationally.
In the same vein we note some similarities between the LDCA circuit and the fermionic swap
network circuit proposed in the context of Hamiltonian evolution for Equation 44. The circuits for the fermionic swap network comprise fermionic swap gates applied on neighboring
qubits that implement evolution under ZZ, Z, XX and Y Y . This is very similar to the
construction of the LDCA circuit with the difference that LDCA also implements XY and
Y X interactions, which do not conserve the number of particles. This suggests that the
fermionic swap network circuit could be employed as a template for variational ansatze with
potentially similar results as those observed for LDCA.

96

Hardware efficient ansatze (HEA). This is a specific kind of hardware heuristic ansatz
(HHA) mentioned previously. These ansatze comprise a series of parametrized quantum circuits originally motivated by the limitations of existing NISQ hardware 56 . The general construction of these circuits comprises L entangling blocks, each block containing parametrized
gates chosen to facilitate implementation according to the limitations in fidelity and connectivity of the hardware employed for the simulation. In general, these circuits can be
expressed as:
|Ψ(θ)i = U (L) (θL ) . . . U (1) (θ1 )U (0) (θ0 ) |Ψ0 i

(67)

where the variational parameters correspond to θ = [θ0 , . . . , θL−1 , θL ], U (k) denotes the k-th
entangling block and |Ψ0 i is a suitable initial state. In the first example of this ansatz 56 , each
entangling block comprised a single layer of parametrized single-qubit rotations followed by
a fixed set of entangling two- qubit gates, specially chosen for a six-qubit quantum processor
employed in the experiment. The circuit has the following form:

U (k) (θk ) =

N
Y

!
k
k
k
RiZ (θi,1
)RiZ (θi,2
)RiZ (θi,3
) Eent ,

(68)

i

where Eent denotes a fixed set of two-qubit gates. In this case, the total number of parameters
scales as 3N (L + 2). For the experiment, the qubit register was initialized with the |0i⊗N
state.
More recently, Barkoutsos et al. 327 proposed a new set of entangling blocks. Two of
these new blocks are designed to implement number-conserving operators, more suitable
for simulations of molecular systems, and can be implemented natively on superconducting
processor with transmon qubits 340–342 . The third type of entangling block introduced by
Barkoutsos et al. 327 is similar to the original proposal (Equation 68), with Eent being a
circuit with all-to-all CNOT gates and with single-qubit rotations corresponding to Rz .
97

For these new ansatze, the Hartree-Fock state was employed as initial state in the VQE
calculation.
The accuracy of HEA have been tested both experimentally 56 and numerically 327 for
small molecular systems including H2 , LiH, BeH2 and H2 O. These implementations have
incorporated the use of active spaces and methodologies for reducing the number of qubits
in the Hamiltonian 343 . Since not all the HEA ansatze conserve the number of particles, a
constrained minimization method must be employed in cases where the number of particles is
conserved, using the number of particles as a constraint. In general, in order to approach the
accuracy of methods like UCCSD, the number of layers has to grow rapidly, even to an extent
that the number of parameters approaches or surpasses the size of the Hilbert space 327 . As
in the case of other variational algorithms, a better understanding of the scaling of accuracy
with the number of layers for different versions of this family of ansatze is required.

Alternative approaches to state preparation. In gate-model quantum computers, it is
important to first initialize the computer into a known state, and to do so with high accuracy.
Typically, the form of the initial state is a product state such as |0 . . . 0i which is simple to
prepare because each qubit can be addressed individually. Once an initial state is prepared,
the evolution of the quantum state through the computer is determined by the sequence of
gates that the algorithm calls for. While improving circuit ansatze help reduce the overhead
in the depth of a quantum circuit after the quantum computer has been initialized, there can
be an advantage in preparing more complicated initial states that are closer to the final state.
For example, VQE relies on ultimately preparing (and then measuring) an entangled state of
many qubits. Thus, an initial state that is already highly entangled could be advantageous
to preparing a desired ground state.
Despite rapid advances in both theory and experiment for quantum computing, significant
efforts must be dedicated toward maximizing the use of NISQ devices while accounting for
their limitations. As we have reviewed earlier in this section, the choice/design of the ansatz

98

Figure 8: a.) Illustration of the quantum autoencoder (QAE) algorithm. After preparing
the training set of quantum states, a variational circuit comprised of encoding and decoding
components is trained using measurements from either the trash state or the final decoded
state. Once successfully trained, the encoding circuit of the overall QAE circuit can compress
a set of n-qubit states to m-qubit states, where m ≤ n. b.) A classical 4-2-4 autoencoder.

99

is a crucial component for algorithmic performance. One particular strategy for lowering
the resource requirements for expressing quantum data (of quantum states) is through the
use of the quantum autoencoder that combines ideas from both quantum simulation and
quantum machine learning. Specifically, the quantum autoencoder 344 is an HQC algorithm
that encodes a set of quantum states using a fewer number of quantum bits, as shown in
Figure 8. For instance, the wave function of molecular hydrogen (in the minimal basis) at a
particular bond length requires four qubits to represent the occupancy of the ground state.
However, the set of these ground states lives on only a one-dimensional manifold in the fourqubit space. This means that the quantum information corresponding to this four-qubit
state can be represented by a single qubit. The task of a quantum autoencoder is to find
a unitary mapping that coherently maps this four-qubit state to a single qubit. The payoff
for finding such a unitary mapping is that it enables a type of generative modeling approach
called Compressed Unsupervised State Preparation (CUSP) that explores the latent space
to find a shorter pathway to a desired ground state 345 . CUSP uses an existing VQE circuit
ansatz, together with a quantum autoencoder, to generate a new ansatz that is shorter in
gate depth and hence less vulernable to noise on a NISQ computer, resulting in more accurate
VQE energies.
5.1.2

Energy estimation in VQE

E
~ , the next stage for the VQE algorithm
After preparing the parametrized trial state Ψ(θ)
~ = hΨ(θ)|H|Ψ(
~
~
is to estimate the expectation value of the target Hamiltonian, E(θ)
θ)i.
In
~ up to a given precision, . Arguably,
practice, this implies estimating the value of E(θ)
the most common application of ab initio quantum chemistry is the calculation of thermochemical properties, such as reaction rates and binding energies. Reaction rates, for example,
are exponentially sensitive to changes in energy: a change of only 1.4 kcal/mol in the free
fenergy (which is proportional to the energy) generates a change of one order of magnitude in
the estimate of a reaction rate. This sensitivity motivates the concept of chemical accuracy,

100

which is a standard for the desired energy accuracy of 1 kcal/mol (1.59 × 10−3 Hartrees,
43.3 meV) or less 79 . This requirement sets an upper bound to the precision, , for energy
estimation in VQE and in general to any quantum simulation algorithm for chemistry.
One possible approach to estimating the energy is the PEA approach, which provides
an estimate of the energy in a single state preparation with cost O( 1 ) for error tolerance
. Unfortunately, to guarantee the success of PEA estimation, all the operations must be
executed fully coherently on the quantum computer, which is only possible using quantum
error correction. This requirement is unattainable on NISQ devices because the operations
available on these devices are too error-prone to achieve useful quantum error correction.
To avoid the overhead of PEA, Peruzzo et al. 52 suggested an alternative scheme called
Hamiltonian averaging for computing the expectation value of local Hamiltonians.

Hamiltonian averaging. The basic idea behind this approach is that any Hermitian
operator, such as the electronic structure Hamiltonian, can be decomposed in the basis of
Pauli operators. Therefore, any Hermitian operator can be written as:

H=

X
i 1 α1

X

hiα11 σαi11 +

i1 α1 i2 α2

hiα11iα2 2 σαi11iα2 2 + · · · ,

(69)

and by linearity the expectation value can be expressed as:

hHi =

X
i1 α1

hiα11 hσαi11 i +

X
i1 α1 i2 α2

hiα11iα2 2 hσαi11iα2 2 i + · · · ,

(70)

where σαi11iα2 ...
represent a product of Pauli matrices, where ij indicates the type of Pauli
2 ...
matrix and αj qubit indices. In the case of approximation based on second-quantized approaches, the Hamiltonian is directly obtained as a sum of Pauli operators after a mapping
from fermions to qubits is applied (see Appendix B). Unlike the PEA approach, where each
k-local Pauli operator requires O(k) circuit depth for the implementation, Hamiltonian averaging only adds a constant factor to the state preparation procedure, assuming parallel
101

rotation and orbital readout is available. However, not all the Hamiltonian terms can be
measured simultaneously, which increases the number of measurements needed to achieve a
given accuracy. In general, the number of state preparations and measurement cycles required to converge the energy to a precision  will scale roughly as M 2 /2 , where M is the
number of terms in the Pauli decomposition of the Hamiltonian. A more detailed analysis of
the number of measurements takes into consideration the structure of the Hamiltonian terms.
P
In general, any Hamiltonian for simulation can be written as H = M
i hi Oi , where {hi } represents the set of Hamiltonian coefficients and {Oi } correspond to a set of Pauli operators.
Assuming that all the terms are measured independently i.e Cov(hOi i, hOj i) = 0 ∀ i 6= j),
the total variance of the estimator of hHi, will be given by the sum of the variances of the
individual Hamiltonian terms

2

 =

M
X
i

|hi |2

Var(hOi i)
,
2i

(71)

where Var(hOi i) denotes the variance of the estimator of hOi i. In practice, we need to
define the precision at which each term is going to be measured. A simple approach would
2


be to measure all the terms to the same accuracy i.e. taking 2i = M
. Considering that

Var(Oi ) = 1 − hOi i2 = σi , where σi is a Pauli term, we can estimate the required number of
measurements, m, as:
M

M

1 X
1 X
m= 2
|hi |2 σi ≤ 2
|hi |2 ,
 i
 i

(72)

A more practical approach is to choose 2i to be proportional to |hi |. This reduces the
estimate in the number of measurements to:
M

m=

1X
|hi |σi
 i

!2
≤

!2
M
1X
|hi | ,
 i

(73)

which can be proved to be optimal by application of the Lagrange conditions 346 . Therefore,
the effective number of measurements will be dependent on the magnitude of the Hamiltonian

102

coefficients, which is the case of electronic structure correspond to linear combinations of 1electron and 2-electron integrals, which in turn depend on the choice of basis set for the
calculation (see Appendix A for an introduction to basis sets).
As noted before, the electronic structure Hamiltonians by definition have O(N 4 ) terms,
however, in a local basis the number of non-negligible terms scale as O(N 2 ) and advanced
techniques can evaluate these contributions in O(N ) time. This is the basis of linear scaling methods employed in quantum chemistry 79,347 . In the particular case of Gaussian-type
orbitals (GTOs), this scaling can be verified by considering the cutoffs due to exponentially
vanishing overlaps between GTOs and bounds on the largest integral to estimate the number
of non-vanishing terms in the Hamiltonian 79,306 . Although this scaling is guaranteed asymptotically, in practice, the molecular size at which this scaling is observed depends on the type
of atoms in the system and the family of basis set used 306 . This analysis applied to Hamiltonian averaging showed that the number of measurements required for achieving precision  in
the energy is expected to scale as O(N 6 /2 ) for molecules of sufficient size, compared to the
formal O(N 8 /2 ) estimated based on the number of terms in the Hamiltonian 306 . Moreover,
this analysis justifies the intuitive strategy of neglecting Hamiltonian terms that are under
a certain threshold δ, such as the maximum δ ≤ Nr , with Nr being the number of removed
terms. In practice, it has been observed that δ = 10−10 is more than sufficient to retain
quantitatively accurate results in molecular calculation with GTOs 79,306,347 .
Alternatively, for Hamiltonians in the plane wave dual basis (Equation 44), the number
of measurements required to estimate the expectation values can be bounded as 301

O

N 14/3
2 Ω2/3


1+

1
4/3
N Ω2/3


.

(74)

This bound is based on upper bounds to the norm of the plane wave dual basis Hamiltonian applied to Equation 73. In this case, it is possible to obtain further savings in the
number of measurements by exploiting the fact of the interaction (V ) and potential terms

103

(U ) of the Hamiltonian are diagonal and commute with each other. Therefore they allow the
use of a separate, unbiased estimation for the mean of the sum of these terms 316 . The kinetic
operator is not diagonal in the plane wave dual basis, but it can be made diagonal by the
application of a fermionic fast Fourier transform (FFFT). This trick can be used to measure
the kinetic operator. Correspondingly, the number of measurements can be bounded as 301 :

m∈O

hV 2 i + hT 2 i
2



 10/3 2/3

η N
η 2/3 N 4/3
⊆O
,
+
2
2

(75)

where η is the number of electrons in the system, and T represents the kinetic energy terms
of the Hamiltonian in Equation 44. This bound is obtained by bounding the norms of the
different terms in the Hamiltonian assuming a neutral system and a fixed density. Since in
finite molecules and bulk materials, η ∈ O(N ), this shows that the number of measurements
does not scale worse than O(N 4 /2 ) for this representation of the Hamiltonian. To avoid the
extra cost of implementing the FFFT, one could also measure U + V at once and measure
T by typical Hamiltonian averaging, which would scale as O(N 4 /2 ) 301 .

Strategies for reducing the number of measurements in Hamiltonian averaging.
The computational cost of operator averaging is one of the factors contributing to the overall
cost of VQE prediction, the others being the depth of the circuit for state preparation and
the number of function calls required by the optimization routine. Different strategies have
been proposed to reduce the cost of operator averaging. The first of these approaches is term
truncation, briefly described in the previous section. Implementation of this approach 216,306
requires ordering the Hamiltonian terms according to the norm of their coefficients, which
correspond to the maximum expected contribution to the total expectation value. After
Pk
this, we can select sequences of particular sums δk =
i=1 |hi |, that correspond to the
maximal bias introduced by neglecting the k smallest terms. Subsequently, one could choose
a constant C ∈ [0, 1) and remove the k ∗ lowest terms such that δk∗ < C2 , where  is the

104

intended accuracy. Correspondingly, the remaining terms must be computed to accuracy
P
2
M
|h
|σ
(1 − C)2 2 , and the number of measurements required would be (1−C1 2 )2
,
i i
i=k∗ +1
where the constant C can be adjusted according to the problem instance and implementation
constraints to minimize the number of measurements.
A second strategy is to group commuting terms in the Hamiltonian to reduce the number
of state preparations required for a single estimate of the energy, which was first described
in McClean et al. 216 . Commuting terms can be measured in sequence without biasing the
final expectation. This can be achieved, for example, by using ancilla qubits to measure the
Pauli operators, which only adds a small overhead in gate depth. When using this technique,
terms within the same measurement group will be correlated, and therefore the covariance
between their expectation values will be different from zero. This could increase or decrease
the number of measurements required for the set of terms depending on whether the covariances are positive or negative, an effect similar to the one observed in correlated sampling in
classical Monte Carlo simulations 348 . In practice, implementing this approach requires classical pre-processing to group the terms into commuting groups using sorting algorithms 312 ,
with a classical computational cost of O(M 2 ) as a result of checking commutativity between
pairs of terms. Furthermore, one must check whether a specific grouping lowers the number
of measurements, which requires access to efficient approximations of the state of interest,
since covariances are state dependent. Therefore, efficient classical algorithms for grouping Hamiltonian terms could benefit from efficient classical approximation to the electronic
structure problem 216 . A stronger condition that can be imposed on groups of commuting
terms is to have all the terms being diagonal in the same tensor product basis, as proposed
in Kandala et al. 56 (for example, the set of terms {ZIXZ, ZIXI, ZZXZ, ZZXI}). This
guarantees that all the expectation values within the set can be obtained from a single state
preparation followed by a specific set of single qubit rotations to measure in the appropriate
tensor product basis.
More recently, Rubin et al. 346 pointed out that N-representability conditions on the

105

fermionic reduced density matrices can be exploited to reduce the number of measurements
in VQE calculations. N-representability conditions define a set of mathematical constraints
which must be satisfied by the reduced density matrices (RDM). The p-electron RDMs (pRDMs) are defined as the set of expectation values ha†i1 aj1 . . . a†ip ajp i, for fermionic or bosonic
systems. In the specific case of fermionic RDMs, the main constraints are the following 349 :
1. RDMs are Hermitian;
2. the 2-RDM is antisymmetric;
3. the (p − 1)-RDM can be obtained by contracting the p-RDM;
4. the trace of each RDM is fixed by the number of particles in the system e.g. the trace
of the 1-RDM is equivalent to the number of particles;
5. RDMs correspond to positive semidefinite density operators.
In addition, constraints related to the total spin and spin quantum numbers (S 2 and Sz )
can be formulated for each marginal 350 . The equality N-representability conditions can be
expressed in a qubit basis by mapping the RDM elements using a standard transformation
such as Jordan-Wigner or Bravyi-Kitaev. The k-th condition can be written as: Ck =
PM
i ck,i hOi i = 0, with Oi being the same terms appearing in the target Hamiltonian for
VQE. These constraints provide extra information about the relations between expectation
values that can be exploited to reduce the number of measurements. The basic idea of the
procedure proposed in Rubin et al. 346 is to add the constraints to the original Hamiltonian
to reduce the sum in Equation 73. Specifically, this is equivalent to running VQE for an
alternative Hamiltonian of the form:

Ĥ = H +

K
X
k=1

βk Ck =

M
X
i=1

hi +

K
X

!
βk ck,i Oi ,

(76)

k

where β is a set of real parameters. Notice that hHi = hĤi due to the definition of the
106

N-representability conditions. Correspondingly, based on Equation 73, the number of measurements can be minimized by performing the following optimization:

min
β

M
X
i=1

hi +

K
X

!
βk ck,i

k

or min
β

M
X
i=1

hi +

K
X

!
βk ck,i Var(Oi ) ,

(77)

k

with the second optimization depending on the availability of a meaningful prior on the
expectation values of the Hamiltonian terms. This optimization problem can be recast as a
convex L1 minimization method by writing the constraints and the original Hamiltonian as
a vector, where each position of the vector represents a fermionic term 346 . The optimal β
can be found by applying standard optimization methods. The application of this strategy
to example molecular Hamiltonians showed reductions of around one order of magnitude
in the number of measurements required 346 . Finally, another direction that deserves more
exploration is the use of Bayesian inference to estimate the expectation values of Hamiltonian
terms, described in McClean et al. 216 . The use of sensible choices of classical approximations
could provide priors for Bayesian estimation potentially leading to reductions in the number
of measurements.
5.1.3

Optimization methods

Several numerical studies comparing the efficacy of different optimization methods have been
published since VQE was first introduced; the original paper 52 used Nelder-Mead, a simple
derivative-free optimization algorithm. McClean et al. 216 studied VQE for optimizing H2
using the software package TOMLAB 351 to compare four algorithms: Nelder-Mead, MULTMIN, GLCCLUSTER, and LGO, finding that LGO was usually superior. Romero et al. 329
simulated VQE for H4 (a system of four hydrogen atoms), using both gradient and derivativefree methods for the classical optimization step. They used algorithms known as L-BFGS-B,
COBYLA, Powell, and Nelder-Mead, observing that the derivative-free methods Powell and
Nelder-Mead often had difficulties converging to the correct answer in the large parameter

107

space required by VQE, with COBYLA and L-BFGS-B showing a better performance.
Romero et al. 329 and Guerreschi and Smelyanskiy 352 proposed quantum circuits to compute analytical gradients for HQC algorithms, the former in the context of VQE and the
latter in the context of the QAOA. Both studies compared the cost of numerical gradients
relative to analytical ones, which depends on the cost function employed. In the case of
QAOA applied to the Max-Cut problem 352 the authors found that for quasi-Newton methods, numerical gradients required fewer overall function calls than analytical gradients, and
both out-performed Nelder-Mead. This is in sharp contrast with VQE applied to electronic
structure Hamiltonians 329 , where the conclusion is that analytical gradients offer a practical
advantage over numerical gradients. The numerical gradients require a few orders of magnitude more measurements to achieve the same accuracy. Both these studies also point out
the dependence of the achieved accuracy and convergence times on the hyper-parameters
chosen for the classical optimizer 329,352 .
In experimental implementations of VQE on NISQ devices, the accuracy of the optimization can be significantly lowered by the fluctuations on the measured properties caused by
noise and finite measurement statistics. This is a major hurdle to the implementation of VQE
for larger systems, where the number of parameters can be significant even for linear scaling
ansatze. Correspondingly, most of the experimental implementations so far have employed
methods that better tolerate these fluctuations, such as Nelder-Mead and Particle-Swarm
Optimization (PSO) 353 , which are gradient free. More recently the Simultaneous Perturbation Stochastic Approximation (SPSA) has been applied 354,355 . This method relies on
numerical gradients computed in random directions. References to these experiments are
provided in Table 5.
For small instances such as H2 in a minimal basis set that require a single variational
parameter, it is possible to sample the energy landscape. In this case, the expectation
values of the Hamiltonian terms are computed within a certain range of the variational
parameters and subsequently fitted using methods such as trigonometric interpolations or

108

Gaussian process regression 55,59 . This procedure provides classical functions (which model
the values of the expectation values of the Hamiltonian terms) as a function of the variational
parameters: hOi (θ)i ≈ fi (θ). Subsequently, the optimization can be performed on the fitted
models to simplify classical post-processing. These functions are convenient when applying
VQE to a family of Hamiltonians (e.g. ground state calculations along a path in the potential
energy surface), since the same expectation values are used to compute all the ground states,
saving measurements.
Methods such as Nelder-Mead are limited to problems with few parameters 356 and more
likely their application is not scalable to large molecules. In contrast, SPSA is better for
treating more parameters and is also expected to be robust to statistical fluctuations 355 .
However, being a method based on numerical gradients, the accuracy and precision of SPSA
is also limited by the step size chosen for the gradient discretization. Choosing a smaller
step size implies lower energy differences and therefore more precision required for the energy
estimation. In fact, the number of measurements required for the estimation of the gradient at a fixed precision increases quadratically with the inverse of the step size, as shown
in Romero et al. 329 . Consequently, methods employing numerical gradients require careful tuning of the hyper-parameters throughout the optimization to minimize the number of
measurements employed. Some heuristic have been proposed for dynamically updating the
hyperparameters of SPSA in VQE calculations (see appendix of Kandala et al. 56 ). Nonetheless, more efforts are needed to design efficient strategies to estimate energies and gradients
to sufficient precision in VQE.
A different and complimentary strategy to improve optimization, and the quality of VQE
results in general, is error mitigation. This term groups a series of recent proposals for improving the quality of the expectation values of observables measured on NISQ devices. Since
estimation of expectation values is at the heart of the VQE protocol, these approaches have a
direct benefit in the accuracy of the energies and gradients measured in VQE, which in turn
could improve the overall performance of the optimization. Some of the proposals for error

109

mitigation assume that the first-order contributions of the noise to the expectation values
can be removed by introducing a controllable source of noise in the circuit of interest 317,318 .
The expectation values are estimated at different error levels and an extrapolation to zero
noise is performed using different mathematical techniques. Some of these methods have
been successfully applied in experimental demonstrations of VQE for small molecules 319 .
However, it has been pointed out that the successful application of some of these approaches
to bigger systems might require lower error rates than those existing today 357 .
Other proposals for mitigating errors are the VQE subspace expansion 58,320 and the
updating of expectation values using marginal constraints 346 . In the former case, described
in more detail in Section 5.1.5, the target Hamiltonian is expanded in a basis built from the
ground state obtained from a regular VQE procedure at the cost of an additional number of
measurements. This new expansion allows for the calculation of excited state energies and
a refined ground state energy which is found to be closer to the exact result. The second
approach exploits the physical constraints of fermionic reduced density matrices, described
in Section 5.1.2, to update the reduced density matrices measured experimentally. Although
the enforcement of these conditions can increase the energy, the procedure can improve the
overall shape of the predicted potential energy surfaces and derived properties such as forces.
Finally, McArdle et al. 357 have also proposed the use of easy-to-implement stabilizer checks
for molecular properties (e.g. electron number parity) to detect errors and discard faulty
state preparations, which improves the overall VQE performance. The so-called stabilizerVQE, can be implemented in combination with other error mitigation strategies. For a more
detailed description of error mitigation techniques we refer the reader to McArdle et al. 358 .
The recent observation 321 that the variational parameter landscape is often plagued by the
overabundance of “barren plateaus” implies that care must be taken when designing a circuit
ansatz for the VQE algorithm. By Levy’s lemma, one can prove that expectation values only
substantially deviate from their mean over an exponentially small fraction of the Hilbert
space. This implies that the use of arbitrary or unstructured ansatze may be uninformative

110

and expensive, as the optimization algorithm would have to search through most of the space
before measuring a non-zero gradient. However, this issue can be circumvented by using
physically motivated ansatze that have measurable gradients and thus could better guide
the optimizer. This is the case of UCC, where classical quantum chemistry methods such
as Møller-Plesset second order perturbation theory and traditional CC or CI can provide
approximate amplitudes to initialize the optimization. As described in Section 5.1.1, the
barren plateau phenomenon presents a challenge to unstructured energy minimization in
VQE. Besides selecting a well-motivated circuit ansatz, several other strategies may be taken
to address this issue. One of these strategies is the “annealed variational” optimization 47
described above. This method can be naturally applied to Hamiltonian variational ansatze,
HEA and LDCA, where the structure of the variational ansatz is naturally divided into
layers or circuit blocks that can be optimized following a block-by-block fashion. We could
also adapt this method to ansatze such as UCC, by separating the excitation operators into
subsets that are implemented and optimized sequentially.
Finally, an alternative strategy to break the optimization into easier, smaller parts is the
Adiabatically Assisted Variational Quantum Eigensolver (AAVQE) method 359 . This method
is inspired by the adiabatic evolution of a ground state in quantum annealing. As in adiabatic
quantum computing, the method employs a parametrized Hamiltonian of the form:

H(s) = (1 − s)H0 + sHP

(78)

where H0 is the initial Hamiltonian, for which the ground state preparation is easily implemented (e.g. a local Hamiltonian may be used), HP is the problem Hamiltonian, and s
interpolates between the two Hamiltonians as it is incremented from 0 to 1. However, rather
than dynamically tuning the interpolation parameter (see Adiabatic Quantum Computing
in Section 5.3.1), the interpolation parameter is used to adjust the Hamiltonian from one
VQE run to the next. The state preparation parameters at each step are initialized by the
optimized parameters of the previous step. As long as the gap of H(s) does not become too
111

small (see Section 5.3.1), the ground state of H(s) will lie close to the ground state of the
Hamiltonian H(s+∆s) in the subsequent step. Thus, AAVQE, which runs VQE while incrementally adjusting the optimization landscape, appears to be another promising approach
for circumventing the barren plateau issue. Notice that this method is not equivalent to
implementing a Hamiltonian variational approach, since it is the Hamiltonian and not the
variational ansatz that has an adiabatic parametrization. Consequently, AAVQE could be
combined with any choice of variational ansatz for its execution.
5.1.4

Physical realizations of VQE

To demonstrate the capabilities of existing quantum devices, few-qubit simulations, often
without error correction, have been carried out in most major architectures used for quantum information, as shown in Table 5. The first experimental demonstration of VQE was
performed in 2014 52 . This experiment employed a two-qubit photonic chip to variationally
minimize the energy of HeH+ . A VQE experiment of the same molecule was achieved using
a system comprising a single trapped ion 53 . These experiments served as proofs-of-principle
for the VQE approaches applied to chemistry but involved non-scalable simplifications of
the Hamiltonians or non-scalable experimental procedures such as full tomography. The first
scalable demonstration of both the IPEA and VQE algorithms employed three superconducting qubits for simulating H2 in a minimal basis and was carried out by a Google Research
and Harvard collaboration 55 . These demonstrations were followed by the demonstration of
VQE with a hardware-based ansatz for H2 , lithium hydride (LiH) and beryllium hydride
(BeH2 ) in a system with six qubits 56 by the IBM quantum computing team. Similarly, the
first scalable simulation of VQE in ion trap quantum computers was demonstrated for H2
and LiH using an approximate implementation of the UCC ansatz with Molmer-Sorensen
gates. In this demonstration, LiH was simulated using an active space approach that exploited the Bravyi-Kitaev mapping to generate an effective Hamiltonian for this molecule in
three qubits 59 .

112

In recent years, various full-stack platforms have been introduced by IBM, Rigetti Computing, and Microsoft, supporting quantum computations via cloud computing. Leveraging
this availability of quantum resources, a recent study computed the deuteron binding energy
using the VQE framework on quantum devices from IBM and Rigetti Computing 330 .
5.1.5

VQE for excited states

Since the development of the variational quantum eigensolver (VQE) algorithm by Peruzzo
et al. 52 , numerous studies and demonstrations of VQE focused on approximating ground
states of physical systems. In principle, the VQE algorithm was designed as a modular
framework, treating each component (i.e. state preparation, energy estimation, classical optimization) as a black box that could be easily improved and/or extended. Recent studies
have leveraged this flexibility, specifically applying different formulations of objective functions to compute excited states, which are fundamental to understanding photochemical
properties and reactivities of molecules. In the following subsections, we highlight several
methods extending the original VQE algorithm for approximating excited states for molecular systems.

Folded Spectrum and Lagrangian-Based Approaches. The first and perhaps the
simplest extension consists of the application of the folded spectrum method, which utilizes
a variational method to converge to the eigenvector closest to a shift parameter λ.
This is achieved by variationally minimizing the operator Hλ = (H − λI)2 according to
Peruzzo et al. 52 . This methodology, though relatively straightforward to implement, requires
a quadratic increase in the number of terms of the effective Hamiltonian. This translates
to a significant increase in the number of measurements needed, especially in the case of
quantum chemistry Hamiltonians 316 .
A related approach consists of adding a set of constraints to the original Hamiltonian in

113

the VQE calculation to construct the Lagrangian 216 :

L=H+

X
i

λi (Si − si I)2

(79)

where λi are energy multipliers, Si are sets of operators associated with the desired symmetries, and si are the desired expectation values for these sets of operators. The set of
operators Si , e.g. spin numbers, accounts for symmetries whereby the energies are minimized by the appropriate excited states (with respect to the original Hamiltonian). We
note that Si2 and Si must be efficiently measurable on the quantum computer to ensure
the efficiency of the method. By solving VQE for the Lagrangian instead of the original
Hamiltonian, it is possible to converge to an approximation of the excited state.
More recently, two new Lagrangian-based approaches were introduced for calculating
excited state energies without the measurement overhead 360 . The first doubles the circuit
depth to measure overlaps between the ground state and the prepared state to put a penalty
on the overlap with the ground state. Choosing this penalty to be large enough ensures that
the first excited state becomes the minimizer of the new cost function. The second method
works by a similar principle, except the size of the quantum register is doubled instead of
the circuit depth. A SWAP test, a circuit construction to compare two quantum states (or
quantum registers) by computing the overlap, is then applied to incorporate a penalty for
the prepared state having overlap with the ground state.

Linear Response: Quantum Subspace Expansion (QSE). More recently, a methodology based on linear response has been developed 320 and demonstrated on existing hardware 58 . In summary, this framework, called the Quantum Subspace Expansion (QSE), extends the VQE algorithm and requires additional measurements to estimate the excited state
energies. That is, after obtaining the the ground state |ψi of a molecule using VQE, an approximate subspace of low-energy excited states is found by taking the linear combinations

114

of states of the form Oi |ψi, where the Oi are physically motivated quantum operators. For
example, in fermionic systems, these operators could correspond to fermionic excitation operators. In the algorithm, the matrix elements hψ| Oi HOj |ψi are computed on the quantum
device. The classical computation then diagonalizes the matrix to find the excited state energies. While the QSE method benefits from the low coherence time requirements of VQE,
the quality of the excited states obtained is subject not only to the quality of the ansatz
employed in VQE but also to the errors induced by the linear-response expansion.

Witness-Assisted Variational Eigenspectra Solver (WAVES). An alternative protocol that also utilizes VQE as a subroutine to compute the ground state is the witness-assisted
variational eigenspectra solver (WAVES) 316 . The objective function in WAVES is augmented
to include the energy (E) as well as an approximation for the entropy (a purity term Tr[ρ2C ]):
Fobj (P, E) = E − T · Tr[ρ2C ].

(80)

In this setup, a control ancilla qubit is considered along with the trial state. Here, the control
qubit behaves as an “eigenstate witness” where its entropy measurement nears zero if the
optimized trial state is arbitrarily close to an eigenstate of the Hamiltonian.
A tunable parameter T (that can be pre-optimized) is used to bias towards excited states.
In the first iteration of WAVES, T is set to 0 (i.e. implementing regular VQE) to compute
the ground state. Then, T is tuned such that when the objective function is optimized, the
resulting trial states correspond to approximate excited states. These states are fed into
the iterative phase estimation algorithm (IPEA) to extract the corresponding excited state
energies. For near-term devices, the IPEA procedure could be replaced by a Hamiltonian
averaging approach 320 .

115

5.1.6

Calculation of molecular properties with VQE

Obtaining the ground state for a molecular system is usually just the first step in a quantum
chemistry study. In most cases, chemists are interested in a variety of molecular properties
that provide insights into the chemistry of the target system. Some of these properties,
such as the dipole moment and the charge density, can be computed by measuring the
corresponding operators represented in the basis set employed for the VQE. For example,
the expectation values of 1-electron (E 1 ) and 2-electron (E 2 ) operators can be calculated
using the same 1-RDM and 2-RDM measured for the optimal state obtained from VQE:

hE 1 i =

X

hE 2 i =

X

pq

pqrs

opq ha†p aq i,

(81)

opqrs ha†p a†q ar as i.

(82)

where the coefficients o represent expansion coefficients. Other properties might require the
estimation of k-RDMs, with k > 2, which requires a larger number of measurements.
The information of the RDMs measured in the VQE procedure can be used to connect the
VQE algorithm with complementary classical algorithms for the calculation of other properties or energy refinement. One possibility is to combine VQE calculations on active spaces
with multi-reference perturbation theory techniques implemented on a classical computer to
add dynamical correlation to the calculations, as suggested in 346 . For example, n-valence
electron perturbation theory 361 requires measurement of the 3-RDM and and 4-RDM in
order to compute the corresponding energy correction. To avoid the measurement cost of
estimating these RDMs, a cumulant approach that approximates this correction using only
the 1-RDM and 2-RDM could be employed 362 . Other techniques that could be implemented
using this strategy are canonical transformation theory 119 and perturbative explicit correlated corrections 363,364 . Similarly, the VQE algorithm can be used as a subroutine for energy
calculation and interfaced with classical routines for geometry optimization and calculation

116

of thermodynamic properties. In all these calculations, an important factor to consider is
the impact of measurement noise, especially when iterative procedures are involved. Investigating the extension of VQE to the calculation of molecular properties common in classical
quantum chemistry is an important direction of research for HQC techniques.

5.2

Other hybrid quantum-classical algorithms for chemistry

In this section, we highlight several other HQC algorithms that may be useful in the context
of quantum chemistry. These recent algorithms highlight the opportunity for continued
innovation in the development of HQC algorithms.
5.2.1

Variational quantum simulator

A common explanation for the efficiency of Hamiltonian simulation is the following: as
a controllable quantum system, the quantum computer can be made to evolve in a way
which mimics the to-be-simulated quantum system. Surprisingly, this canonical approach to
quantum simulation, that was detailed in Section 4, is not the only method for accomplishing
this task. Motivated by the hopeful prospects of near-term quantum algorithms, such as
VQE, Li and Benjamin 200 introduced a variational quantum algorithm which implements
Hamiltonian simulation, known as the variational quantum simulator algorithm.
Instead of applying quantum gates which simulate Hamiltonian dynamics, the variational
quantum simulator algorithm applies a series of tunable gates to prepare a tunable output
state. The evolution is discretized (t1 , t2 , . . .), such that the task of the algorithm is to
determine a series of circuit parameter settings (θ~1 , θ~2 , . . .) for which the subsequent output
states (U (θ~1 )|ψ0 i, U (θ~2 )|ψ0 i, . . .) approximate the time-evolved states (|ψ(t1 )i, |ψ(t2 )i, . . .)
according to the Schrödinger equation. The algorithm achieves this by invoking the variational principle: the optimal “path” in parameter space for expressing the dynamics is the one

Rt
~
~
which is stationary with respect to variation of the action tif dthψ(θ(t))|
i dtd − H |ψ(θ(t))i.
The Euler-Lagrange equation derived from this variation-minimization problem determines a
117

˙
differential equation for the evolution of the parameters M θ~ = V~ . The crux of the algorithm
is that the entries of the matrix M and vector V~ can be estimated from measurements made
on the quantum computer. It is important to note that these measurements are facilitated
by using an ancilla qubit which is coupled to the system register through controlled-unitary
gates. For details of the measurement scheme used to determine M and V~ , refer to the
original publication 200 .
Each subsequent setting for the parameters is then determined by the update rule
θ~i+1 = M −1 V~ (ti+1 − ti ) + θ~i .

(83)

This matrix inversion and multiplication is carried out by a classical processor. The role of
~ 0 i, which are unlikely
the quantum computer is to explore families of output states, U (θ)|ψ
to be representable on a classical computer, and to use these states to efficiently estimate
the entries of M and V~ .
5.2.2

Imaginary-time variational quantum simulator

The variational quantum simulator technique has been developed further for problems beyond quantum simulation. In McArdle et al. 365 a variant of the variational quantum simulator is used for preparing certain useful quantum states. The key insight of this paper is
that the time evolution in the variational quantum simulator algorithm can be replaced by
imaginary-time evolution e−i(−iτ )H = e−τ H .
The functioning of the algorithm is similar to the variational quantum simulator algorithm, apart from replacing t with −iτ . Imaginary-time evolution is useful for preparing a
thermal state at temperature T with respect to the Hamiltonian: ρ(T ) = e−H/T /tr(e−H/T ).
If the system is initialized in the completely mixed state I/d, then the imaginary-time
evolution of τ = 1/(2T ) will yield a thermal state e−τ H · dI · e−τ H ∝ e−H/T .

Prepa-

ration of a thermal state can be used for preparing approximations to the ground state

118

of the Hamiltonian by taking the limit T → 0, since, for a non-degenerate Hamiltonian
|ψgs ihψgs | = limT →0 e−H/T /tr(e−H/T ).
With approximate preparation of a Hamiltonian’s ground state, this algorithm can be
used as an alternative to the variational quantum eigensolver algorithm. Initial simulations
show that this method is competitive with the traditional gradient descent approach of the
variational quantum eigensolver. Hardware implementations which directly compare the two
methods are still needed.
5.2.3

Imaginary-time variational quantum simulator for excited states

The imaginary-time variational quantum simulator can be used as a substitute for VQE. Just
as variants of VQE have been developed for determining excited state energies of Hamiltonians 320,360 , a variant of the imaginary-time variational simulator has been proposed to do
the same 339 .
Similar to the excited-state energy methods described in Section 5.1.5, the VQS version of
determining excited state energies iteratively builds up the spectrum starting with the ground
state energy. Furthermore, in both approaches, each step introduces a penalty term to the
Hamiltonian that is proportional to the projector onto the previously-found eigenstate. As
proposed before 360 , a short-depth swap test circuit is added 339 to measure the contributions
to the Hamiltonian from the additional projectors. The difference in the VQS version for
determining excited states is that these penalty terms added to the Hamiltonian alter the
imaginary-time dynamics, rather than the cost-function that is optimized.
The value of these algorithms is that they provide alternative approaches to several
established quantum algorithms. An important caveat regarding these alternative algorithms
is that, as with VQE, they are heuristic. There are no guarantees on their performance, and
their proper functioning can only be established on a case-by-case basis. Furthermore, the
true test of such heuristic algorithms will be when they are implemented on hardware. So,
while these algorithms, along with VQE, are promising candidates for making use of near-

119

term quantum devices, more substantial experimental testing is needed to determine their
potential for scalability.

5.3

Non-gate-based methods for quantum chemistry

5.3.1

Adiabatic

The results discussed so far are based on gate model quantum computers, which can be
broadly categorized as the “digital” approach to quantum simulation. The overall unitary
quantum evolution being simulated is eventually decomposed into a sequence of elementary
operations called quantum gates in a way similar to how logic gates underlie classical computers. However, there is an alternative “analog” approach to quantum computing based on
adiabatic quantum evolution 60 that has also gained much attention in the quantum information community. Rapid experimental progress has been underway to scale up devices for
realizing adiabatic quantum computing architectures (D-Wave Systems Inc., 2018).
In the context of quantum chemistry, research has focused on the analog simulation of
molecules by mapping the electronic structure problem to a Hamiltonian of spins with additional coupling terms 366 , although proposals exist for simulating chemical reactions 367–369
and protein folding simulations 370,371 . We will illustrate the analog simulation of electronic
structure in the case of hydrogen in a minimal basis set, as shown in Babbush et al. 366 . The
Hamiltonian of molecular hydrogen in the minimal basis mapped to a four-qubit system,
using the Bravyi-Kitaev transformation, takes the following form 181,366 :

Helec = µ1 I + µ2 Z1 + µ3 Z2 + µ4 Z3 + µ5 Z1 Z2

(84)

+ µ6 Z1 Z3 + µ7 Z2 Z4 + µ8 X1 Z2 X3 + µ9 Y1 Z2 Y3

(85)

+ µ10 Z1 Z2 Z3 + µ11 Z1 Z3 Z4 + µ12 Z2 Z3 Z4

(86)

+ µ13 X1 Z2 X3 Z4 + µ14 Y1 Z2 Y3 Z4 + µ15 Z1 Z2 Z3 Z4 ,

(87)

We refer to Appendix C.3 for a derivation and description of this formula. A suitable
120

adiabatic quantum computer would be able to effectively encode such a spin Hamiltonian.
It would then evolve the system from an “easy” Hamiltonian (such as the transverse field
P
H0 = i Xi ) with known ground state to the spin Hamiltonian of interest, therefore encoding
the ground state of the molecule in its final state.
Two major challenges in successfully implementing this adiabatic evolution are keeping
the energy scales well below the size of energy gaps in the Hamiltonian throughout the
evolution and realizing the many-body interactions. For the first issue, the energy scales
that must be considered are temperature and speed with which the Hamiltonian is changed.
Thermal fluctuations which drive the system out of the ground state can be mitigated by
keeping the system at extremely low temperatures. Additionally, the Hamiltonian must be
changed slowly enough relative to the transition energy of the first excited state (the energy
gap) so that non-adiabatic transitions do not drive population out of the ground state. For
the second issue, certain many-body terms in the Hamiltonian, such as three- and fourbody terms X1 Z2 X3 and Y1 Z2 Y3 Z4 , are difficult to implement experimentally. Techniques
exist to reduce them to two-body terms by adding ancilla qubits and encoding the correct
couplings in the lowest eigenstate of a different Hamiltonian, which is commonly called gadgetization 42,208,372–374 . Although gadgetization schemes have greatly improved over the last
decade, they provide limited tunability over the couplings that are required to construct the
problem Hamiltonian. This poses a challenge as molecular Hamiltonians and the adiabatic
evolution require the spread of coupling term strengths over multiple orders of magnitude.
Therefore, experimental progress in the field of adiabatic quantum computing for chemistry
applications hinges on the development of non-gadgetized, highly tunable multi-spin couplers that either directly encode the problem Hamiltonian or reduce the mapping overhead
of gadgetization.

121

5.3.2

Linear optics

As we have seen earlier, much of the work in quantum simulation is related to the structure
of atoms and molecules, such as electronic structure, which are typically fermionic in nature.
However, bosonic dynamics govern many other aspects of chemical systems; for instance,
the vibrational modes of molecules can be described by phonon transitions, which obey
bosonic statistics. While one could imagine devising a gate-model quantum algorithm to
simulate this system, optical quantum systems are native to bosonic statistics and represent
a platform for carrying out this simulation more efficiently than encoding the problem into
a qubit formalism. The first realization of this protocol was introduced by Huh and Yung 228
and targeted the simulation of the Franck-Condon profile. This work and its successors 375,376
are the only examples of native simulation of bosonic chemical systems on a quantum device
to date.
In Section 3, we discussed some of the complexity issues related to computing distributions whose probability amplitudes are derived from matrix permanents. Here we give a
description of how the algorithm works. The goal is to compute the FCP by sampling from
the output distribution of a modified boson sampling device, as shown in Figure 9.
This modification of the optical apparatus stems from the unitary transformation (Equation 19) that encodes the molecular problem 220 . On top of the M -dimensional rotation of
the bosonic modes given by the Duschinsky rotation R̂U , one has to include the displacement D̂δ caused by the different minima of the nuclei in the electronic ground and excited
states, together with the squeezing ŜΩ† 0 that photons undergo for transitioning to different
frequency states (Ω0 → Ω). These effects are encoded in the initial state preparation, which
can be written as a squeezed coherent state |ψi = ŜΩ D̂δ |vaci. The unitary rotation R̂U is
implemented in a linear optics setup, and precedes the last squeezing operation ŜΩ† 0 . The
second squeezing operation might be challenging to implement in optical setups, for which
Huh et al. proposed a more efficient setup, compressing the two squeezing operations into
the initial state, so that the FCP simulation is isomorphic to a Gaussian Boson Sampling
122

<latexit sha1_base64="xjn3cFQT7L4+VsXNsrq22s42DU8=">AAAB6nicbVBNS8NAEJ3Ur1q/qh69LBbRU0mkoN6KXjxWMLbQhrLZbtqlu5uwuymU0L/gxYOKV3+RN/+NmzYHbX0w8Hhvhpl5YcKZNq777ZTW1jc2t8rblZ3dvf2D6uHRk45TRahPYh6rTog15UxS3zDDaSdRFIuQ03Y4vsv99oQqzWL5aKYJDQQeShYxgk0uTc77ol+tuXV3DrRKvILUoECrX/3qDWKSCioN4VjrrucmJsiwMoxwOqv0Uk0TTMZ4SLuWSiyoDrL5rTN0ZpUBimJlSxo0V39PZFhoPRWh7RTYjPSyl4v/ed3URNdBxmSSGirJYlGUcmRilD+OBkxRYvjUEkwUs7ciMsIKE2PjqdgQvOWXV4l/Wb+pew+NWvO2SKMMJ3AKF+DBFTThHlrgA4ERPMMrvDnCeXHenY9Fa8kpZo7hD5zPHzHOjd8=</latexit>

v00

v10

.

. .

FC profile

<latexit sha1_base64="Ow/OIU+W9UHqZVtZ09U+MVyB3E4=">AAAB6nicbVBNS8NAEJ3Ur1q/qh69LBbRU0mkoN6KXjxWMLbQhrLZbtqlu5uwuymU0L/gxYOKV3+RN/+NmzYHbX0w8Hhvhpl5YcKZNq777ZTW1jc2t8rblZ3dvf2D6uHRk45TRahPYh6rTog15UxS3zDDaSdRFIuQ03Y4vsv99oQqzWL5aKYJDQQeShYxgk0uTc77Xr9ac+vuHGiVeAWpQYFWv/rVG8QkFVQawrHWXc9NTJBhZRjhdFbppZommIzxkHYtlVhQHWTzW2fozCoDFMXKljRorv6eyLDQeipC2ymwGellLxf/87qpia6DjMkkNVSSxaIo5cjEKH8cDZiixPCpJZgoZm9FZIQVJsbGU7EheMsvrxL/sn5T9x4ateZtkUYZTuAULsCDK2jCPbTABwIjeIZXeHOE8+K8Ox+L1pJTzBzDHzifP9cLjaM=</latexit>

Count rate

Energy

0
vm

<latexit sha1_base64="OKwaGfvf/kmQ00ATClSFZwhAS2I=">AAAB6nicbVBNS8NAEJ3Ur1q/qh69LBbRU0mkoN6KXjxWMLbQhrLZbtqlu5uwuymU0L/gxYOKV3+RN/+NmzYHbX0w8Hhvhpl5YcKZNq777ZTW1jc2t8rblZ3dvf2D6uHRk45TRahPYh6rTog15UxS3zDDaSdRFIuQ03Y4vsv99oQqzWL5aKYJDQQeShYxgk0uTc77br9ac+vuHGiVeAWpQYFWv/rVG8QkFVQawrHWXc9NTJBhZRjhdFbppZommIzxkHYtlVhQHWTzW2fozCoDFMXKljRorv6eyLDQeipC2ymwGellLxf/87qpia6DjMkkNVSSxaIo5cjEKH8cDZiixPCpJZgoZm9FZIQVJsbGU7EheMsvrxL/sn5T9x4ateZtkUYZTuAULsCDK2jCPbTABwIjeIZXeHOE8+K8Ox+L1pJTzBzDHzifP9WIjaI=</latexit>

···
<latexit sha1_base64="nzBzl2EHHmDTqXdjvnR25IPCseI=">AAAB7XicbVBNS8NAEJ3Ur1q/qh69BIvgqSQiqLeiF48VjC20oWw223bpZjfsToQS+iO8eFDx6v/x5r9x0+ag1QcDj/dmmJkXpYIb9Lwvp7Kyura+Ud2sbW3v7O7V9w8ejMo0ZQFVQuluRAwTXLIAOQrWTTUjSSRYJ5rcFH7nkWnDlbzHacrChIwkH3JK0EqdPo0Vmtqg3vCa3hzuX+KXpAEl2oP6Zz9WNEuYRCqIMT3fSzHMiUZOBZvV+plhKaETMmI9SyVJmAnz+bkz98QqsTtU2pZEd67+nMhJYsw0iWxnQnBslr1C/M/rZTi8DHMu0wyZpItFw0y4qNzidzfmmlEUU0sI1dze6tIx0YSiTagIwV9++S8JzppXTf/uvNG6LtOowhEcwyn4cAEtuIU2BEBhAk/wAq9O6jw7b877orXilDOH8AvOxzdRO48X</latexit>

vn

U

<latexit sha1_base64="vOSmtQv3r3sINwUCARdKy7tpB/U=">AAAB6XicbVBNS8NAEJ34WetX1aOXxSJ4KokI6q3oxWNFYwttKJvtpl262YTdSaGE/gQvHlS8+o+8+W/ctjlo64OBx3szzMwLUykMuu63s7K6tr6xWdoqb+/s7u1XDg6fTJJpxn2WyES3Qmq4FIr7KFDyVqo5jUPJm+Hwduo3R1wbkahHHKc8iGlfiUgwilZ6GHVVt1J1a+4MZJl4BalCgUa38tXpJSyLuUImqTFtz00xyKlGwSSflDuZ4SllQ9rnbUsVjbkJ8tmpE3JqlR6JEm1LIZmpvydyGhszjkPbGVMcmEVvKv7ntTOMroJcqDRDrth8UZRJggmZ/k16QnOGcmwJZVrYWwkbUE0Z2nTKNgRv8eVl4p/Xrmve/UW1flOkUYJjOIEz8OAS6nAHDfCBQR+e4RXeHOm8OO/Ox7x1xSlmjuAPnM8f0qKNrw==</latexit>

.

v

.

.

v2
<latexit sha1_base64="dbTFqFU3Mljm7k8xapxo3Y9qeOU=">AAAB6XicbVBNS8NAEJ3Ur1q/qh69LBbBU0mKoN6KXjxWNLbQhrLZbtqlm03YnRRK6U/w4kHFq//Im//GbZuDtj4YeLw3w8y8MJXCoOt+O4W19Y3NreJ2aWd3b/+gfHj0ZJJMM+6zRCa6FVLDpVDcR4GSt1LNaRxK3gyHtzO/OeLaiEQ94jjlQUz7SkSCUbTSw6hb65YrbtWdg6wSLycVyNHolr86vYRlMVfIJDWm7bkpBhOqUTDJp6VOZnhK2ZD2edtSRWNugsn81Ck5s0qPRIm2pZDM1d8TExobM45D2xlTHJhlbyb+57UzjK6CiVBphlyxxaIokwQTMvub9ITmDOXYEsq0sLcSNqCaMrTplGwI3vLLq8SvVa+r3v1FpX6Tp1GEEziFc/DgEupwBw3wgUEfnuEV3hzpvDjvzseiteDkM8fwB87nD3fujXM=</latexit>

v0 1
<latexit sha1_base64="4v6AVnuugkoGgUOfu5eyNwQixSU=">AAAB6XicbVBNS8NAEJ34WetX1aOXxSJ4KokI6q3oxWNFYwttKJvtpF262YTdTaGE/gQvHlS8+o+8+W/ctjlo64OBx3szzMwLU8G1cd1vZ2V1bX1js7RV3t7Z3duvHBw+6SRTDH2WiES1QqpRcIm+4UZgK1VI41BgMxzeTv3mCJXmiXw04xSDmPYljzijxkoPo67XrVTdmjsDWSZeQapQoNGtfHV6CctilIYJqnXbc1MT5FQZzgROyp1MY0rZkPaxbamkMeogn506IadW6ZEoUbakITP190ROY63HcWg7Y2oGetGbiv957cxEV0HOZZoZlGy+KMoEMQmZ/k16XCEzYmwJZYrbWwkbUEWZsemUbQje4svLxD+vXde8+4tq/aZIowTHcAJn4MEl1OEOGuADgz48wyu8OcJ5cd6dj3nrilPMHMEfOJ8/dmuNcg==</latexit>

<latexit sha1_base64="8cQkOITmmdHhLswqRXJNS0lgS3w=">AAAB6XicbVBNS8NAEJ34WetX1aOXxSJ4KokI6q3oxWNFYwttKJvtpF262YTdTaGE/gQvHlS8+o+8+W/ctjlo64OBx3szzMwLU8G1cd1vZ2V1bX1js7RV3t7Z3duvHBw+6SRTDH2WiES1QqpRcIm+4UZgK1VI41BgMxzeTv3mCJXmiXw04xSDmPYljzijxkoPo67brVTdmjsDWSZeQapQoNGtfHV6CctilIYJqnXbc1MT5FQZzgROyp1MY0rZkPaxbamkMeogn506IadW6ZEoUbakITP190ROY63HcWg7Y2oGetGbiv957cxEV0HOZZoZlGy+KMoEMQmZ/k16XCEzYmwJZYrbWwkbUEWZsemUbQje4svLxD+vXde8+4tq/aZIowTHcAJn4MEl1OEOGuADgz48wyu8OcJ5cd6dj3nrilPMHMEfOJ8/dOiNcQ==</latexit>

···
<latexit sha1_base64="nzBzl2EHHmDTqXdjvnR25IPCseI=">AAAB7XicbVBNS8NAEJ3Ur1q/qh69BIvgqSQiqLeiF48VjC20oWw223bpZjfsToQS+iO8eFDx6v/x5r9x0+ag1QcDj/dmmJkXpYIb9Lwvp7Kyura+Ud2sbW3v7O7V9w8ejMo0ZQFVQuluRAwTXLIAOQrWTTUjSSRYJ5rcFH7nkWnDlbzHacrChIwkH3JK0EqdPo0Vmtqg3vCa3hzuX+KXpAEl2oP6Zz9WNEuYRCqIMT3fSzHMiUZOBZvV+plhKaETMmI9SyVJmAnz+bkz98QqsTtU2pZEd67+nMhJYsw0iWxnQnBslr1C/M/rZTi8DHMu0wyZpItFw0y4qNzidzfmmlEUU0sI1dze6tIx0YSiTagIwV9++S8JzppXTf/uvNG6LtOowhEcwyn4cAEtuIU2BEBhAk/wAq9O6jw7b877orXilDOH8AvOxzdRO48X</latexit>

Nuclear coordinate

| i = S(⇠)D( )|0..0i
<latexit sha1_base64="+JsWfCB+lCYXAC6+tFkb1G4/nEA=">AAACFHicbVA9SwNBEN3zM8avU0ubxSAkIMedCGohBLWwjGhMIBfC3maSLNnbO3b3xJDkT9j4V2wsVGwt7Pw3bpIrNPHBwOO9GWbmBTFnSrvutzU3v7C4tJxZya6urW9s2lvbdypKJIUyjXgkqwFRwJmAsmaaQzWWQMKAQyXoXoz8yj1IxSJxq3sx1EPSFqzFKNFGatgHAz9WzJdEtDngM3yT9x9YAV/m/SZwTQp44DqOm/oNO+c67hh4lngpyaEUpYb95TcjmoQgNOVEqZrnxrreJ1IzymGY9RMFMaFd0oaaoYKEoOr98VdDvG+UJm5F0pTQeKz+nuiTUKleGJjOkOiOmvZG4n9eLdGtk3qfiTjRIOhkUSvhWEd4FBFuMglU854hhEpmbsW0QySh2gSZNSF40y/PkvKhc+p410e54nmaRgbtoj2URx46RkV0hUqojCh6RM/oFb1ZT9aL9W59TFrnrHRmB/2B9fkDs2Wc1g==</latexit>

Figure 9: Left: Sketch of the photoelectric spectrum of the ionization of a molecule. The
energy level diagram shows the electronic ground and excited state of the molecule, with
its corresponding vibrational energy levels. Vibronic transitions are allowed between the
two distinct electronic states, with the intensity of the peaks given by the wave function
overlap integral hvk0 m|v0 i. According to the Franck-Condon principle, due to the slower
motion of nuclei the most intense peak in the vibronic spectrum corresponds to the vertical
transition in the energy level diagram (blue arrow). The whole spectrum is known as the
Franck-Condon profile (FCP). Right: Modified boson sampling device to simulate the FCP.
An initially prepared squeezed-coherent state of light (dashed blob represents the resulting
photonic entangled state) is sent through a photonic circuit, where a judicious choice of beam
splitters and phase shifters implement the Doktorov rotation U . Sampling from the output
distribution of this apparatus yields the FCP, up to a certain error , given by the number
of measurements.

123

problem 377 .
Given this setup, the following hybrid classical-quantum sampling algorithm can efficiently generate the FCP profile at T = 0 K:
1. With the information of the potential energy surfaces obtained from electronic structure calculations, calculate the parameters that define the Doktorov transformation.
The electronic structure method could be a classical approach such as time-dependent
density functional theory (TD-DFT), but eventually also a quantum computation.
2. Build a Gaussian boson sampler as described above, that implements this Doktorov
transformation and samples on the phonon number basis, and collect the photon numbers {mk } in each mode.
3. For every detection event estimate the corresponding associated energy E = ~ωk mk
where mk is the number of detected photons and increment its corresponding bin by
one unit.
4. Repeat the sampling Nsamp times until the estimated statistical error is below a given
threshold FCP .
5. Output the normalized profile of the counting statistics.
This result has recently motivated proof-of-principle experimental quantum simulations
of molecular spectroscopic systems with linear optics 375,376 . The paper by Clements et al. 375
is the first instance of an experimental FCP of a small molecule, tropolone. The improved
algorithm accounts for the unavoidable effects of experimental imperfections. As such it is
an excellent example of a scalable simulation in the absence of error-correcting techniques.
In Sparrow et al. 376 , the authors simulate the vibrational quantum dynamics of a variety of
molecules (H2 CS, SO3 , HNCO, HFHF, N4 and P4 ), both in the harmonic and anharmonic
regime, using a reprogrammable photonic chip.

124

Linear optics is the most natural platform for the simulation of vibrational quantum
dynamics, as photons have the same boson statistics as the vibrational excitations (phonons).
Nevertheless, other physical platforms such as trapped ions or superconducting circuits have
proven useful in simulating molecular dynamics. In particular, Shen et al. 378 reproduce
the molecular vibronic signal of SO2 , using solely the vibrational excitations in a trapped
ion device. Superconducting circuits have no experimental realizations as of yet, however
promising architectures have been theoretically proposed. In particular the proposal by
Olivares et al. 379 consists of superconducting resonators interacting through tunable couplers.
In their approach the authors perform a quantum quench in the superconducting simulator,
initially prepared in the molecular ground state. The abrupt change takes the system out of
equilibrium, in a way that the system relaxes to the ground state populating the resonators
with a distribution that resembles that of the FCP.

5.4

Chapter 5 Glossary
Var(X)

Variance of X

Cov(X, Y )

Covariance between X and Y

N

Number of spin orbitals, number of qubits

η

Number of electrons

~
|Ψ(θ)i

Variational state

~
U (θ)

Variational unitary

H

Hamiltonian

|Ψ0 i

Reference state

T

Cluster operator

O

Observable

S

Number of steps in Hamiltonian variational ansatz

t

Time

a†p , ap

Fermionic second quantization operators in canonical basis
125

c†p , cp

Fermionic second quantization operators in alternative basis

b†p , bp

Bogoliubov second quantization operators

γp† , γp

Majorana second quantization operators

M

Number of terms in the Hamiltonian

Γ

Covariance matrix for fermionic gaussian state

U

Rotation matrix

C

Constant

Rj

Rotation matrix

Ubog

Bogoliubov transformation

L

Number of layers in LDCA ansatz

Tij

Coefficient of kinetic term in Hamiltonian

Uij

Coefficient for potential term in Hamiltonian

Vij

Coefficient for interaction term in Hamiltonian

X, Y , Z, I

Pauli Operators

σx, σy , σz , I

Pauli Operators

O(·)

Big-O notation

O

Observable

NISQ

Noisy intermediate-scale quantum

HQC

Hybrid quantum-classical

VQE

Variational quantum eigensolver

VQC

Variational quantum-classical

CUSP

Compressed unsupervised state preparation

PEA

Phase estimation algorithm

PMA

Physically motivated ansatz

HHA

Hardware heuristic ansatz

HEA

Hardware efficient ansatz (a specific kind of HHA)

CC

Coupled cluster
126

6

UCC

Unitary coupled cluster

UCCSD

Unitary coupled cluster singles and doubles

LDCA

Low-depth circuit ansatz

FGS

Fermionic gaussian state

BCH

Baker-Campbell-Hausdorff

ASP

Adiabatic state preparation

DVR

Discrete variable representation

FSN

Fermionic swap network

BCS

Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer

HF

Hartree-Fock

Summary and outlook

Quantum chemists have come to embrace a set of computational tools which have driven
much innovation in chemistry over the last half century. As quantum computers become
available, many of these computational tools will be supplemented with, or even replaced
by, quantum computations. Furthermore, quantum computation will likely inspire new theoretical approaches and computational methods for solving problems in chemistry. As a
precedence, consider the way that early computational tools gave rise to the invention of
Monte Carlo methods 380 . Today’s quantum chemists face an impending disruption of their
field. As with the previous computational revolution in quantum chemistry, the practitioners
and early adopters will drive much of the innovation. This article has aimed to provide the
perspective and basic tools helpful in beginning the practice of using quantum computation
for chemistry.
In the near term, quantum computation will likely first be used for ab initio electronic
structure calculations in quantum chemistry. Quantum algorithms for chemistry, then,
should be viewed as alternatives to the state-of-the-art post-Hartree-Fock methods such

127

as coupled-cluster, Møller-Plesset perturbation theory, and density-matrix renormalization
group techniques. Such calculations often suffer from inaccuracies due to approximations
of the quantum electronic wave function (c.f. Section 2.2). Quantum computers provide a
solution to this problem by naturally handling wave functions that span the full Hilbert
space to estimate energies, electric polarization, magnetic dipoles, reduced density matrices,
etc. The canonical problem that is expected to be solved is the computation of ground and
excited state energies of small molecules. Such calculations serve as the starting point for
computing many useful quantities, such as reaction pathways, binding energies, and rates of
chemical reactions.
There are two distinct approaches to estimating the electronic ground state energies. The
first method, proposed by Aspuru-Guzik et al. 45 , uses the quantum phase estimation algorithm to make quantum measurements of the energy of a trial wave function, as described in
Section 4.1.2. Although promising, this method requires the use of quantum error correction
to properly function, and is therefore not feasible using near-term quantum devices.
In contrast, the second method for estimating ground state energies was specifically
developed to be deployable on currently available quantum hardware, without a dependence
on quantum error correction for proper functioning. This algorithm, known as the variational
quantum eigensolver, as described in Section 5.1 has become the focus of the state-of-the-art
quantum experiments 55,56 . It is possible that the first commercial use of quantum computers
will involve applying the variational quantum eigensolver algorithm to predict the electronic
structure properties of small molecules. In the few years since its invention, there has
been significant algorithmic development surrounding the variational quantum eigensolver
algorithm 320,326,327,360 . Yet, there remains room for innovation surrounding this and other
variational quantum algorithms. It is possible that these innovations, coupled with advances
in hardware, will enable commercial utility of quantum devices far sooner than anticipated.
This crossover point will likely be arrived at through the synergistic collaboration between
quantum chemists, quantum information scientists, and quantum device engineers.

128

Already, insights from quantum chemistry have led to substantial improvements in quantum algorithms. Variational ansatze borrowed from classical quantum chemistry such as the
unitary coupled cluster have informed state preparation techniques 329 in several quantum
algorithms. The quantum subspace expansion technique, developed in McClean et al. 320 ,
was motivated by the concept of linear response of the ground state.

Finally, the N-

representability problems and the 2-RDM constraints inspired the methods in Rubin et al. 346
for improving expectation value estimates in VQE. Yet, many avenues remain to be explored.
For example, a recent paper 381 initiated the use of low-rank tensor decompositions for improving the performance of certain quantum algorithms for chemistry simulation. Such techniques should find a broader range of applicability in quantum algorithms. Furthermore, as
techniques in quantum algorithms mature, it is likely that methods from perturbation theory will be useful in pushing the capabilities of quantum computers, especially in regard to
active space methods.
It is difficult to predict the course of quantum computing in the long term. In particular,
it is difficult to predict when or if algorithms on near-term noisy intermediate-scale quantum
devices will outperform classical computers for useful tasks. But it is likely that, at some
point, the achievement of large-scale quantum error correction will enable the deployment of
a host of so-called error-corrected quantum algorithms, which in many cases have theoretical
guarantees on their performance. These error-corrected algorithms include the celebrated
Grover search algorithm, Shor’s factoring algorithm, and the HHL linear system of equations
algorithm. Regarding quantum chemistry, quantum error correction would enable the use of
the various Hamiltonian simulation algorithms, as described in Section 4.1. These Hamiltonian simulation algorithms can be used to simulate the dynamics of quantum systems.
But, more importantly, Hamiltonian simulation serves as a subroutine for other algorithms,
such as the quantum phase estimation algorithm. Thus, with quantum error correction,
the quantum phase estimation algorithm could become a viable alternative option to the
variational quantum eigensolver for ground state energy estimation. That said, many of the

129

techniques that have, and will be developed for the variational quantum eigensolver, will
likely be employed for preparing the initial state in the phase estimation algorithm.
The use of quantum error correction also stands to improve the performance of variational
quantum algorithms such as VQE. For instance, error-correction could lead to an improvement in the preparation of good ansatz states for the variational quantum eigensolver, as
described in Section 5.1.1. However, a possible future scenario is that, by the time useful, large-scale quantum error correction is achieved, the dichotomy between error-corrected
algorithms and non-error-corrected algorithms will have become blurred. Already, several
methods have been introduced which aim to bridge the gap between these two classes of
quantum algorithms 382–384 .
The landscape of quantum algorithm development has recently been changing quite dramatically. With the arrival of usable quantum devices 385,386 , we have now entered a prototype
era in the field of quantum algorithms. Use of these devices has and will continue to spur the
development of many new quantum algorithms at a substantially increased rate. In particular, the ability to test performance on real quantum devices facilitates the development of
heuristic quantum algorithms 52,200,320,326,331,344,382 . In the past few years, several papers have
proposed new quantum algorithms along with experimental demonstrations on quantum devices 387,388 . This points to the increasing value in having quantum algorithm developers
working closely with quantum machines. Fortunately, this synergy has been amplified by
the development of software platforms such as Rigetti’s pyQuil 389 , IBM’s QISKit 390 , ETH
Zürich’s ProjectQ 391 , Google’s Cirq 392 , and Xanadu’s Strawberry Fields 393 .
Any reasonable forecast on the timing of the quantum utility crossover point is given with
a wide margin of error. The more conservative estimates predict that this crossover will occur
in 15 to 20 years 394 . However, the most optimistic estimates predict that quantum computers
will solve useful problems in 2 to 5 years 395 . The estimated dates for reaching this horizon
are strongly determined by progress in hardware development and are extrapolated based
on recent advances in quantum device technology 56,385,396,397 . However, quantum algorithm

130

development also serves to influence these estimates. Quantum simulation for quantum
chemistry provides a rather striking example. Over the last five years, as outlined in Section
4.2.2, the asymptotic scaling of quantum simulation algorithms for quantum chemistry have
been dramatically improved from a high-degree polynomial to sublinear in the number of
orbitals. Furthermore, continued development in quantum error correction 237,398 and errormitigation techniques 200,317 will also improve prospects. So, while progress in quantum
hardware development carries us toward the utility horizon, progress in quantum algorithm
development moves this landmark itself closer into our reach.
With this perspective, then, there is ample opportunity for quantum chemists and quantum theorists to make valuable algorithmic contributions toward the quest for useful quantum
computation. So far, many of the quantum approaches take inspiration from the standard
classical techniques. For example, the variational quantum eigensolver algorithm can be
viewed as a quantum version of Ritz’s variational method. With novel computational means,
there is an opportunity for developing more quantum chemistry methods which truly have
no classical analogs. Quantum computing for quantum chemistry is likely to develop into a
rich subfield of quantum chemistry. Now is an opportune time to enter into this emerging
research field. Through cross-disciplinary engagements, early practitioners of these novel
computational tools will usher in a renaissance for computational methods in chemistry.

Acknowledgements
A.A.-G acknowledges support from the Army Research Office under Award No. W911NF-151-0256 and the Vannevar Bush Faculty Fellowship program sponsored by the Basic Research
Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Research and Engineering (Award number
ONR 00014-16-1-2008). A.A.-G. also acknowledges generous support from Anders G. Froseth
and from the Canada 150 Research Chair Program. L.V. acknowledges support by the Czech
Science Foundation (Grant No. 18-18940Y). S.S. is supported by the DOE Computational

131

Science Graduate Fellowship under grant number DE-FG02-97ER25308. TM was supported
by the Office of the Director of National Intelligence (ODNI), Intelligence Advanced Research
Projects Activity (IARPA), via U.S. Army Research Office Contract No. W911NF-17-C0050. The views and conclusions contained herein are those of the authors and should
not be interpreted as necessarily representing the official policies or endorsements, either
expressed or implied, of the ODNI, IARPA, or the U.S. Government. The U.S. Government is
authorized to reproduce and distribute reprints for Governmental purposes notwithstanding
any copyright annotation thereon.

A

Quantum chemistry basis sets

Wave function ansatzes for the electronic structure problem where the total wave function is
approximated as a product of one-electron functions, or methods based in second quantization techniques where the system is represented in the Fock basis, require the introduction
of a set of system-dependent one-particle functions φ(xi ), where xi represents the spatial
and spin coordinates of a single electron. In practice, the set of one-particle functions is
finite, introducing an approximation error associated with a truncated representation of
the Hilbert space, or basis-set incompleteness. Furthermore, these one-electron functions,
also called spin-orbitals, are usually expanded as linear combinations of a set of standard
system-independent functions, which are called the basis set functions. Choosing basis set
functions with the right mathematical properties can significantly facilitate the evaluation
of the Hamiltonian elements and expectation values.
Ideally, basis set functions should be designed to capture the physics of the problem,
such that a good representation can be achieved using as few functions as possible. Correspondingly, the performance of the basis set is usually measured as the difference with
the undiscretized problem, which would correspond with a hypothetical infinite basis set.
A good basis set should allow for a systematic and quickly converging extrapolation to this

132

basis set limit. Furthermore, basis sets should have a mathematical form that facilitates the
evaluation of molecular integrals and should be able to accurately describe not only total
energies but also other properties. The existing basis sets in computational chemistry offer
different levels of compromise among these desired qualities.
The first and most important aspect to consider in the choice or design of a basis set is
the nature of the problem. Molecular systems can be roughly categorized into two types:
periodic systems and isolated molecules. The first case describes extended systems modeled
as unit cells with periodic boundary conditions, such as crystals. In periodic systems, the
periodic density does not vanish exponentially far away from the nuclei, unlike the case of
isolated molecules. Molecular crystals and large biomolecules can be considered intermediate
cases between these two extremes. Traditionally, periodic systems have been described using
plane-wave basis sets whereas the basis sets for isolated molecules have been dominated by
basis sets with atom-centered functions.
In isolated molecules, the electronic density is highly peaked around the nuclei and vanishes exponentially away from them, which justifies the chemical view of molecules as atoms
interacting mostly through their outermost regions. This intuition applied to basis sets inspired the linear combination of atomic orbitals (LCAO) method, which conceives molecular
spin-orbitals as linear combinations of a fixed set of atomic basis set functions, also called
atomic orbitals (AOs). This framework has the advantage of providing a systematic way of
constructing basis sets for molecules by keeping a dataset of AOs for most elements in the
periodic table.
The functional form of atomic basis sets is inspired by the solutions of the Schrödinger
equation for hydrogen-like atoms (one electron and one nucleus), which have the following
general form:
Φ(~r) = Rnl (r)Yl,m (θ, φ)

(88)

where n is the natural quantum number, l and m are the angular momentum and magnetic
quantum numbers, Ylm (θ, φ) is a spherical harmonic function, Rnl (r) is a product of Laguerre
133

polynomials and a term decaying exponentially with r, and (r, θ, φ) are spherical coordinates.
Slater-type orbitals (STOs) have the same structure of the orbitals of hydrogenic atoms,
with the radial function taking the form:
RnST O (r) = N rn−1 e−ζr

(89)

where N is a normalization constant and ζ is called the orbital exponent. The exponent
controls the degree of “diffuseness” of the orbital, meaning how fast the density vanishes
as a function of the nuclear distance. Consequently, within a basis set comprised of several
STOs, the minimum and maximum orbitals exponents determines how far and how close the
resulting wave function can be represented.
AO basis sets are then constructed by choosing a particular combination of individual
basis set functions for each of the orbitals in a given atom. For example, one could construct
a basis set for any element in the second period of the periodic table by using five STOs with
different exponents and appropriate spherical harmonics to represent the 1s, 2s, 2px , 2py , 2pz
orbitals of the electronic configuration of these elements. One could further improve the
flexibility of the basis set by expressing each orbital as a linear combination of n STOs with
different exponents, instead of using a single one. This strategy is regarded as the n-zeta
representation.
The main advantage of STOs is that they capture the appropriate behavior of electron
density near and far from the nuclei, with appropriate cusps for s orbitals at the nuclei and
exponential decaying tails. Unfortunately, the calculation of the molecular integrals using
STOs has to be carried out numerically because of the lack of analytical solutions, restricting
the use of STOs to small molecules. This difficulty motivated the adoption of Gaussian type
orbitals (GTOs) as basis sets. Spherical GTOs have the same angular form of STOs, but
differ in the form of the radial function which adopts a gaussian form instead of the original

134

exponential:
2

RnGT O (r) = N rn−1 e−ζr .

(90)

Furthermore GTOs can be also cartesian, where the spherical harmonic factor is replaced by
a cartesian product of the form xi y j z k , where x, y and z are the components of the radial
distance between the electron and the center of the gaussian and the sum i+j +k determines
the angular momentum. GTOs have convenient analytical properties that allow for efficient
schemes for the computational evaluation of molecular integrals. However, unlike STOs, they
do not describe the cusp and exponential tails of the electronic density correctly. A middle
ground between accuracy in the representation and computational ease is the contracted
GTOs scheme, where a linear combination of GTOs, also referred as primitives is used to
emulate a single STO. The set of primitive STOs is called a contraction. Contracted GTOs
have been adopted as the main basis set functions for electronic structure calculations in
isolated molecules 399 , with different families of basis sets created to fit different purposes.
Although different families of Gaussian basis sets differ in the specific parameters and
optimization strategy employed, they share similar structures and nomenclatures. Most
families are created by augmenting the number of basis sets using the N-Zeta strategy. A
minimal basis set corresponds to a 1-zeta, denoted as SZ (single zeta), comprising a number
of orbitals corresponding to the orbitals in the electronic configuration of the period of the
corresponding element. For example, elements in the second row of the periodic table would
have five orbitals corresponding to (1s, 2s, 2px , 2py , 2pz ) for an SZ basis set. The flexibility
of the basis set can be increased by multiplying the number of contractions employed to
represent valence orbitals, which play a more prominent role in the molecule energetics. For
example, a DZ (double zeta) basis set would have twice the number of valence orbitals of
a SZ basis set ((1s, 2s, 2s0 , 2px , 2p0x , 2py , 2p0y , 2pz , 2p0z )). The number of orbitals can be also
augmented by adding polarization functions. Correspondingly, a DZP (double zeta plus

135

polarization) would include orbitals of angular momenta 2 for elements in the second row of
the periodic table. In addition to polarization functions, diffuse functions (GTOs with small
exponents) can be included to improve the description of tails of the density, especially in
system such as anions. Similarly, tight functions (GTOs with large orbitals exponents) can
be included when the description of core electrons plays an important role in the accuracy.
Apart from the strategies for augmentation of the basis set size, there are two different
contraction schemes: segmented and general contracted basis sets. In segmented contractions, different sets of primitive GTOs are used to represent different orbitals. An example
of segmented contracted basis is the 3-21G basis that belongs to the split-valence family
(also called Pople family) 300 . In a 3-21G basis, core electrons are described with a single
contraction of 3 GTOs while valence electrons are made of contractions of 2 and 1 GTOs. In
contrast, the general contractions approach employs the same set of primitive GTOs expands
all the orbitals, with only the combination coefficients differing between different orbitals.
Most basis sets in use share elements of both segmented and general contraction. Some
Gaussian basis sets have been also developed to improve the calculation of magnetic and
electronic properties and to include relativistic effects. For a more detailed description of
atomic orbital basis sets we refer the reader to references 400,401 .
Atomic basis sets are well suited to describe electron densities in isolated molecules, where
the densities resemble those of individual atoms. However, energy bands in periodic systems
are different from atomic orbitals. For example, in metals, valence electrons have a behavior
more similar to free electrons. Correspondingly, solutions to the particle-in-a-box problem
can offer a better description of periodic systems, giving rise to plane-waves (PW) basis sets,
which have a complex exponential form. In a three-dimension cell, a PW can be expressed
as:
r
φν (r) =

1
exp
V

136



2πνr
L


(91)

for a wave with wavevector corresponding to the ν-th harmonic of a box with length L and
volume V . The size of the PW basis set is determined by the chosen value of the maximum
energy and the volume V of the unit cell, and in contrast with atomic basis sets, does not
depend on the number of atoms within the cell. Correspondingly, the description of core
electrons might require a large number of PW basis sets due the large energies, and thus,
PW are usually employed in combination with pseudopotentials to describe core electrons.
Compared to GTOs, PW basis sets generally require an order of magnitude more functions
to achieve a similar accuracy.
Recently, the dual plane-wave basis set (dual PW), corresponding to the Fourier transform of PW, has been proposed as an alternative for electronic structure calculations on
quantum computers 301 . PWs and their dual diagonalize the kinetic and potential operators,
respectively. The dual PW basis set has the advantage of providing a more compact representation of the molecular Hamiltonian in second quantization. These functions have a form
that resembles the Sinc function, which is expressed as:

Sinc(x) =

sin(πx)
πx

(92)

The Sinc function is oscillatory in nature just like a plane wave, but its amplitude decays to
zero away from the expansion point x. The dual PW and Sinc functions can be used as basis
sets by placing functions at a number of real-space grid points. The quality of the basis set
can be improved by decreasing the separation in the grid.

B

Mappings to qubits

In this section we introduce the two main approaches to mapping second-quantized quantum chemistry Hamiltonians to qubit Hamiltonians. We define the mappings and discuss
their benefits, drawbacks, and variants. For a more-detailed introduction to these various
mappings, refer to McArdle et al. 358 .
137

B.1

Jordan-Wigner mapping

In the Jordan-Wigner mapping, each electronic orbital, described by creation operator a†j is
associated to a qubit j via
a†j ↔ (σz )1 ⊗ . . . ⊗ (σz )j−1 ⊗ (σ + )j ⊗ I,
where σz =

1 0 
0 −1

and σ + =

(93)

0 1
0 0 . This induces a correspondence between each second-

quantized basis state (a†K )iN . . . (a†1 )i1 |vaci and a corresponding computational basis state
|i1 i ⊗ |i2 i ⊗ . . . ⊗ |iN i, where each i1 , . . . , iN is 0 or 1. Notice that the creation operators
a†i act non-trivially on i qubits. This is a consequence of the creation operator carrying
out two actions: the action of changing the occupation is carried out locally by σi+ , while
the action of applying a phase according to the parity (even or odd) of the occupations for
orbital labels less than i is achieved by a string of σZ (see Equation 93). The high weight
of the parity-counting phase can be costly for certain quantum simulation algorithms. So,
while each spin-orbital occupation operator a†i ai is local, acting only on the ith qubit, other
one-body operators a†i aj can be very non-local due to the high weight of the parity.
A dual version of the Jordan-Wigner mapping is the so-called parity mapping 181 . Here,
the parity operators are low-weight, while the occupation operators become high-weight. In
the parity mapping, the creation and annihilation operators are
a†j ↔ I ⊗ (σz )j−1 ⊗ (σ + )j ⊗ (σx )j+1 ⊗ . . . ⊗ (σx )N

(94)

This definition induces a transformation from Jordan-Wigner product states to parity product states,
|i1 i ⊗ . . . |iN i → |i1 i ⊗ |i1 ⊕ i2 i ⊗ . . . |i1 ⊕ . . . ⊕ iN i ,

(95)

where ⊕ indicates addition modulo-two. While the Jordan-Wigner mapping stores the occupation of each spin-orbital in each qubit, the parity mapping stores the parity in each

138

qubit.
While the parity mapping is a valid transformation from fermionic operators to qubits,
so far, it has not been considered as a useful contender for use in quantum simulation.
Rather, it serves as a useful pedagogical tool for motivating the Bravyi-Kitaev transformation
introduced in the following subsection.

B.2

Bravyi-Kitaev mapping

The Bravyi-Kitaev mapping 180 combines the advantages from the Jordan-Wigner and parity
mappings to yield creation and annihilation operators which act non-trivially on O(log N )
qubits (i.e. have weight O(log N )). This is important for quantum simulation, as largerweight terms in the Hamiltonian require longer circuits for their simulation. The original
Bravyi-Kitaev encoding is defined for the case that N = 2n . In this case the maximum
weight of any encoded a†j is exactly log2 N according to Havlı́ček et al. 402 . The creation and
annihilation operators in the Bravyi-Kitaev mapping have a more involved description than
in the Jordan-Wigner or parity mapping. For a full description of these operators, see Seeley
et al. 181 . We limit ourselves to presenting the transformation from Jordan-Wigner product
states to Bravyi-Kitaev product states:

|i1 i ⊗ . . . |iN i → |b1 i ⊗ . . . ⊗ |bN i ,

139

(96)

where bk =

Pk

l=1 [β r ]kl il

mod 2 and the matrix β r is defined recursively as

β 1 = 1,


(97)



 βr


β r+1 = 





0


1 ... 1


0 . . . 0

..
.. 
.
.
.


0 . . . 0

βr

(98)

As an example, in the case of N = 23 , the matrix defining the Bravyi-Kitaev transformation
is

1


0


0



0
β3 = 

0


0



0

0

1 1 1 1 1 1 1
1 0 0 0 0 0
0 1 1 0 0 0
0 0 1 0 0 0
0 0 0 1 1 1
0 0 0 0 1 0
0 0 0 0 0 1
0 0 0 0 0 0





0


0



0
.

1


0



1

1

(99)

The Bravyi-Kitaev transformation, as presented here, applies only for systems with a
spin-orbital number equal to a power of two. A closely related variant of the Bravyi-Kitaev
transformation, known as the Bravyi-Kitaev tree method, also achieves a mapping with
O(log N )-weight creation and annihilation operators 402 . The algorithm for generating this
mapping uses the data structure known as Fenwick trees, which were originally used for
arithmetic coding compression algorithms 403 . Although the scaling of operator weight is
the same as that of the standard Bravyi-Kitaev mapping, in practice the Bravyi-Kitaev tree
method produces higher-weight creation and annihilation operators 358 . However, it has been
noted 358 that, in contrast to the standard Bravyi-Kitaev mapping, the Bravyi-Kitaev tree
140

method enables the use of qubit-reduction techniques when the spin-orbital number is not a
power of two.

C

From quantum chemistry to quantum computation:
example of molecular hydrogen

C.1

Introduction

The purpose of this appendix is to present a detailed description of the workflow underlying
a simple quantum computation (VQE calculation) of a quantum chemistry problem. We
will focus on a concrete problem and progress step-by-step through the various assumptions,
simplifications, and calculations taken to convert the chemistry problem into results on
a quantum computer. This section is intended to speak to both quantum chemists and
quantum information scientists and is structured as follows:
(a) define the chemistry problem,
(b) map the problem onto the quantum computer,
(c) provide a brief introduction to (circuit-model) quantum computation,
(d) apply the variational quantum eigensolver algorithm to treat the problem.

C.2

Defining the chemistry problem

We address the problem of determining the electronic ground state energy of molecular
hydrogen as a function of the distance between the nuclei. This relationship is otherwise
known as the ground state energy dissociation curve (Figure 10). An accurate description
of this energy surface is a key challenge in quantum chemistry that can provide insight on
a range of chemical phenomena, e.g. bond breaking and reaction dynamics. To simplify the

141

problem, we apply the Born-Oppenheimer approximation, in which we treat the nuclei as
stationary classical particles. This is justified as the ratio of electronic to nuclear mass is
roughly 1:1000, leading to a separation in the timescale of their dynamics. The resulting
quantum Hamiltonian describing the electronic system, in atomic units, can be written as

Helec = −

X ∇2r

i

i

2

−

X Zi Zj
X
Zi
1
+
+
,
|R
−
r
|
|R
−
R
|
|r
−
r
|
i
j
i
j
i
j
i,j
i,j>i
i,j>i

X

(100)

where ri are the position coordinates of the electrons, which parametrically depend on the
fixed position coordinates of the nuclei Ri , and Zi and Mi denoting the nuclear charges
and masses, respectively. The electronic system, as written in the first-quantized picture in
Equation 100, assumes an infinite-dimensional Hilbert space. When applying quantum computation for chemistry, the Hamiltonian is instead often considered in the second-quantized
formulation, in which the system can be described approximately using a finite basis. For
our example of molecular hydrogen, we consider the minimal basis (STO-6G). For a deeper
review of basis sets, the reader should refer to Appendix A. Within this framework, states
are labeled by the occupation of the orbitals, and the exchange symmetry of the particles is
naturally considered through the use of fermionic creation and annhilation operators. The
electronic Hamiltonian can then be expressed in terms of these second-quantized operators
as

H=

X
pq

hpq a†p aq +

1X
hpqrs a†p a†q ar as ,
2 pqrs

(101)

where ap is an electron annihilation operator that removes an electron from an orbital with
label p. The weights of the operators are given by the molecular integrals

142

Z
hpq =

∇2r X Zi
−
2
|Ri − r|
i

dx φ∗p (x)

!
φq (x)

(102)

φ∗p (x1 )φ∗q (x2 )φs (x1 )φr (x2 )
,
|r1 − r2 |

(103)

and

Z
hpqrs =

dx1 dx2

where we use xi to denote the spatial and spin coordinates, i.e. xi = (ri , σi ). In practice,
several electronic structure packages and codes have been developed and optimized for computng these integrals. To prepare our quantum computation for molecular hydrogen, we use
such classically pre-computed integrals to prepare the second-quantized Hamiltonian.
0.2
FCI

Energy (hartree)

0.0
−0.2
−0.4
−0.6
−0.8
−1.0
−1.2
0.0

0.5

1.0

1.5

2.0

2.5

3.0

3.5

Bond length (angstrom)

Figure 10: Dissociation profile of molecular hydrogen in the minimal basis (STO-6G). The
ground state energies computed using the full configuration interaction (FCI) method are
shown. The ideal goal in applying the VQE algorithm for chemistry is to compute energies
that approximately reproduce the FCI results.

C.3

Mapping the problem

In classical computation, the chemistry problem is treated by solving the necessary equations
using a method that implements some level of approximations. In quantum computation, an
143

extra “translation” step is necessary to encode the second-quantized Hamiltonian in a system
of quantum bits, or qubits, prior to treating the problem. This is achieved by applying a
mapping from the set of creation and annihilation operators in the Hamiltonian to the set
of operators on qubits, in which the mapping preserves the algebraic relationships, i.e the
fermionic canonical commutation relations. We note that this step is a general prerequisite
for implementing Hamiltonian simulations, the quantum phase estimation algorithm, or
the variational quantum eigensolver. In Appendix B, we review the two most well-known
mappings, the Jordan Wigner and the Bravyi-Kitaev transformations.
For our molecular hydrogen example, we employ the Bravyi-Kitaev transformation, mapping the minimal-basis second-quantized Hamiltonian shown in Equation 101 to a four-qubit
Hamiltonian

Helec = µ0 I + µ1 Z1 + µ2 Z2 + µ3 Z3 + µ4 Z1 Z2

(104)

+ µ5 Z1 Z3 + µ6 Z2 Z4 + µ7 X1 Z2 X3 + µ8 Y1 Z2 Y3

(105)

+ µ9 Z1 Z2 Z3 + µ10 Z1 Z3 Z4 + µ11 Z2 Z3 Z4

(106)

+ µ12 X1 Z2 X3 Z4 + µ13 Y1 Z2 Y3 Z4 + µ14 Z1 Z2 Z3 Z4 .

(107)

Here, Xj , Yj , and Zj are Pauli operators acting on the jth qubit, such as X1 = σx ⊗ I ⊗ I ⊗ I
and the µk are determined by the integrals from Equations 102 and 103. As described in
O’Malley et al. 55 , symmetries in this Hamiltonian can be exploited to construct a two-qubit
Hamiltonian representing the symmetry sector of the original Hamiltonian that contains the
ground state. The resulting two-qubit Hamiltonian is

H̃elec = ν0 I + ν1 Z1 + ν2 Z2 + ν3 Z1 Z2 + ν4 X1 X2 + ν5 Y1 Y2 ,

(108)

where the νj are linear combinations of the µk . This is the final form of the Hamiltonian we
will use in our quantum computation to determine the ground state energy as a function of
interatomic spacing.
144

C.4

A brief introduction to quantum computation

After encoding the computational problem or task onto the quantum computer, we can approach the said task (or parts of the overall task) on the quantum computer by manipulating
its qubits with relevant quantum operations. Before we describe the application of the variational quantum eigensolver (VQE), an algorithm that involves both classical and quantum
computations, we briefly introduce the workings of a quantum computation. The following
paragraphs describe the widely used “circuit-model” of quantum computation. However, as
described in the main text, other models such as adiabatic quantum computation exist.
Just as bits are the elementary units of a (classical) computation, quantum bits or qubits
are the elementary units of a quantum computation. Qubits are controllable two-level quantum systems. Analogous to logic gates, which comprise, en masse, a computation, quantum
gates are simple actions or operations performed on qubits, which, in sequence, comprise
a quantum computation. Specifically, a quantum gate is a unitary transformation which,
typically, manipulates just a few qubits at a time. As an example, a common single-qubit
gate is a “Z-gate”, or “phase-gate”, which maps the quantum state |0i to itself, and the
state |1i to − |1i. While this phase-gate only changes the (unobservable) phase of these
two states, it affects a non-trivial action on superpositions of these states. For example,
√
the quantum state |+i = (|0i + |1i)/ 2 is transformed to the orthogonal state vector
√
√
Z(|0i + |1i)/ 2 = (|0i − |1i)/ 2 = |−i. This transformation may be physically realized by subjecting the two level system to a driving term that is diagonal in the qubit basis,
i.e. proportional to σz . A qubit flip between the 0 and 1 state, in turn, may be realized
by a drive along σx . Similarly, a two-qubit gate may be implemented by inducing a direct
or indirect coupling between two qubits. A two-qubit gate is fully characterized by how it
transforms the four two-qubit basis states |00i , |01i , |10i , and |11i.
In its simplest form, a quantum computation implements the following three steps, as
illustrated using a circuit diagram in Fig. 11:
1.) initialize the qubits in the state |0i ⊗ . . . ⊗ |0i,
145

2.) apply a sequence of quantum gates U |0 . . . 0i, and
3.) measure to obtain either 0 or 1 for each qubit.
These steps can be combined and manipulated at a higher level to achieve more sophisticated tasks. Namely, the variational quantum eigensolver (VQE) algorithm complements
“quantum” routines comprising of executions of quantum circuits with classical routines to
estimate the ground state energy of molecular systems. In the following subsection, we will
describe the VQE algorithm in the context of finding the ground state energy of molecular
hydrogen.

Figure 11: An illustration of a quantum computation using the circuit model. Various
quantum and/or quantum-classical algorithms leverage the capabilities of quantum circuits
to achieve computational tasks or subtasks.

C.5

Variational quantum eigensolver for quantum chemistry

As detailed in Section 5.1, the variational quantum eigensolver (VQE) is a hybrid quantumclassical algorithm that estimates molecular properties, often the ground state energies, of
146

quantum systems using the variational principle. Consequently, a promising application of
VQE is quantum chemistry. At a high level, VQE allocates subtasks between quantum and
classical resources based on the inherent strengths and capabilities of each device. In this
framework, the role of the quantum computer is to prepare the parametrized trial quantum
E
state ψ(~θ) (also known as the ansatz ) and estimate the energy with respect to the Hamiltonian. The ansatz is constructed by applying a variational circuit, that is a parametrized
quantum circuit U (~θ) with classical parameters θ~ to an initial or reference state |φ0 i. The role
of the classical processor is then to orchestrate the minimization of the energy expectation
through feedback to the parameters ~θ. Procedurally, the VQE algorithm can be summarized
in the following steps:
E
1.) prepare the parametrized trial quantum state ψ(~θ) = U (~θ) |φ0 i on the quantum
computer,2
2.) estimate the expectation value of energy

D

E
~ using measurements of terms
~ H ψ(θ)
ψ(θ)

in the Hamiltonian,
3.) update the parameter(s) θ~ of the quantum state using a classical optimization routine,
4.) repeat the previous steps until convergence criteria (e.g. in energy and/or iteration
number) are satisfied.
Often the challenge in VQE is the choice and/or design of the ansatz, which largely
influences the performance of the algorithm 321 . This has motivated numerous studies and
designs of ansatze, several of which are reviewed in Section 5.1.1. For our case of simulating
molecular hydrogen, we selected an ansatz based on the unitary coupled cluster (UCC)
method, as shown in Figure 12. To construct the ansatz, the Hartree-Fock reference state
(i.e. |01i) is first prepared, followed by quantum operations corresponding to the application
of the UCC operators. For more detail on the UCC method, the reader should refer to
2

Normalization is assumed.

147

Section 5.1.1. We note that for the H2 example, this level of theory is equivalent with the
exact solution.
Once the ansatz is selected, its variational circuit implementation is executed on the
quantum computer to compute the objective function value, which, in the case of VQE,
is the energy expectation. We note that initialization of the variational circuit parameters
should ideally be informative. For instance, in the case of unitary coupled-cluster ansatz, the
classically computed MP2 amplitudes can be used to initialize the VQE parameters (i.e. UCC
amplitudes). The energy expectation can then be estimated using the Hamiltonian averaging
procedure. Given that the Hamiltonian is written as a sum of Pauli terms acting on subsets
of qubits, we can compute the energy expectation by averaging over the expectation values
of the individual Pauli terms, as shown below:

hHi =

X
i

hi hOi i,

(109)

where Oi is a Pauli term, a tensor product of Pauli operators (i.e. X, Y , Z, or I) acting on
some subset of qubits, and hi is the corresponding weight.
In the case of molecular hydrogen, the energy expectation expression becomes

hHi = ν0 I + ν1 hZ1 i + ν2 hZ2 i + ν3 hZ1 Z2 i + ν4 hX1 X2 i + ν5 hY1 Y2 i.

(110)

We note that when measuring each Pauli expectation, post-rotations may need to be
applied to make measurements in the Z basis. These measurements are then collected and
processed to approximate the total energy. In practice, we can only obtain a finite number
of measurements, leading to errors in the energy estimation. For a deeper analysis of the
sampling error, the reader should refer to Section 5.1.2 or McClean et al. 216 . While VQE is
a near-term alternative to the quantum phase estimation algorithm due to its low coherence
time requirements, the trade-off or cost of the algorithm is the large number of measurements
needed to approximate the ground state energy with high precision.
148

Figure 12: The quantum circuit used in VQE to estimate the ground state energy for molecular hydrogen in the minimal basis. After preparing the parametrized quantum state, using
the Hartree-Fock reference state followed by the application of the unitary coupled clusterinspired variational circuit. To estimate the energy expectation, necessary post-rotations
(Rt ∈ {RX (−π/2), RY (π/2), I}) are applied before measuring the qubits in the Z basis.
After computing the energy expectation with respect to some values assigned to the parameters, VQE employs a classical optimization routine to update the parameters to ideally
reach a quantum state that better approximates the ground state. Section 5.1.3 reviews a
number of optimization routines used and benchmarked for VQE in previous studies. Provided that the ansatz can well describe the ground state and the classical optimizer is robust
against noise in the cost function landscape, VQE can provide a high-quality estimation
for the ground state energy. This is observed for our small example of molecular hydrogen,
shown in Figure 13a, in which a simulation of the VQE algorithm was able to compute ground
state energies along the energy surface that were numerically equal to the corresponding FCI
energy values. Note that we also show the sampling error at a particular geometry in Figure
13b.
Since first presented in 2014, VQE has been widely studied and improved from both theoretical and experimental standpoints. In particular, VQE was experimentally implemented
for molecular systems beyond hydrogen as highlighted in Section 5.1, demonstrating the
utility and potential of the algorithm for applications in quantum chemistry even on early
quantum computers.

149

a)

b)
0.2

0.0
FCI
VQE

0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8

0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0

1.0
1.2
0.0

exact
nsamples = 100

0.2

Energy (hartree)

Energy (hartree)

0.0

0.5

1.0

1.5

2.0

2.5

3.0

1.2

3.5

4

Bond length (angstrom)

3

2

1

0

1

2

3

4

Variational parameter ✓

Figure 13: VQE simulation results for molecular hydrogen in the minimal basis (STO-6G).
a) Dissociation profile computed using the VQE algorithm. At each bond length, the energy
computed using VQE is numerically equal to that of the FCI method. The L-BFGS-B
method was used for parameter optimization. b) Energy expectation plotted over a range
of parameter values for bond length of 1.2 Angstroms. A parameter scan using a finite
number of samples is overlaid with that generated using the wave function simulator. These
simulations were implemented using OpenFermion 404 and Forest 389 .

C.6

Appendix Glossary

l

angular momentum quantum number

m

magnetic quantum number

Rlm (r)

a product of Laguerre polynomials and a term decaying exponentially with r

Helec

Electronic Hamiltonian

ri

Position coordinates of electrons

Ri

Fixed position coordinates of nuclei

Ψi

Basis wave functions

σi

Spin degree of freedom for electrons

φi,j

Molecular orbitals

Yl,m

Spherical harmonic with orbital angular momentum quantum numbers l,m

ai , a†i

Fermionic annihilation and creation operator on orbital φi

|vaci

Fermionic vacuum state
150

Zi

(Eqn. 106-108) i-th nuclear charge

σz

Pauli Z matrix

σ+

(σx + iσy )/2

n

A positive integer

I

Identity operator

Xj , Yj , Zj

(Eqn. 110-116) Pauli X,Y, and Z operator acting on the j-th qubit

µi

Coefficients of electronic Hamiltonian terms

H̃elec

2-qubit electronic Hamiltonian (symmetry sector of the original Hamiltonian)

νi

Coefficients of 2-qubit electronic Hamiltonian terms; linear combinations of µi

U

A unitary operator

Ψ0 (t~)

Ansatz state

U

Unitary operation

ψ(t~)

Ansatz state

U (t~)

Variational quantum circuit

|φ0 i

Initial/reference quantum state

Oi

A tensor product of Pauli operators

hi

Weight of Pauli operator corresponding to Oi

I

Identity operator

VQE

Variational quantum eigensolver

HF

Hartree-Fock

UCC

Unitary coupled cluster

SPSA

Simultaneous perturbation stochastic approximation

PSO

Particle swarm optimization

STO

Slater-type orbitals

GTO

Gaussian type orbitals

PW

Plane-wave

151

Table 5: Representative experimental demonstrations of the VQE algorithm using various
quantum computer architectures. Here SPSA and PSO stand for simultaneous perturbation
stochastic approximation and particle swarm optimization, respectively.
Architecture/
Platform

Systemof-interest

Photonic chip

HeH

+

Single trapped
ion

HeH+

Number of
physical
qubits

Ansatz

Optimization
Routine/
Strategy

Computed
properties

Reference

2

Hardwarespecific
parametrized
ansatz

Nelder-Mead

Ground state
energy

52

UCC

Nelder-Mead

Ground and
excited state
energies

53

Superconducting
processor
H2
(transmon qubits)

2

UCC

Grid scan and
locally optimize

Ground state
energy

55

Superconducting
processor
H2
(transmon qubits)

2

“Hardwareefficient”
ansatz

SPSA

Ground state
energy

56

LiH

4

“Hardwareefficient”
ansatz

SPSA

Ground state
energy

56

BeH2

6

“Hardwareefficient”
ansatz

SPSA

Ground state
energy

56

H2

2

UCC

Grid scan and
locally optimize

Ground state
energy

59

LiH

3

Approximate
UCC

Grid scan and
locally optimize

Ground state
energy

59

2

Hardwarespecific
parametrized
ansatz

PSO

Ground and
excited state
energies

58

Two chlorophyll
units in 18-mer
2
ring of
LHII complex

“Parametrized
Hamiltonian”
ansatz with
truncation
scheme

PSO

Ground and
excited state
energies

316

UCC

Grid scan

Ion trap
processor
(Ca+ ions)

Superconducting
processor
H2
(transmon qubits)

Silicon photonic
chip

Superconducting
processor
Deuteron
(transmon qubits)
via Cloud

2-3

152

Ground state
energy

330

References
(1) Nielsen, M. A.; Chuang, I. L. Quantum Computation and Quantum Information; Cambridge University Press, 2010.
(2) Divincenzo, D. P. Scalable Quantum Computers; Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co.
KGaA, 2005; pp 1–13.
(3) Brown, K. R.; Kim, J.; Monroe, C. Co-designing a scalable quantum computer with
trapped atomic ions. npj Quantum Inf. 2016, 2 .
(4) Monroe, C.; Kim, J. Scaling the Ion Trap Quantum Processor. Science 2013, 339,
1164–1169.
(5) Blatt, R.; Wineland, D. Entangled states of trapped atomic ions. Nature 2008, 453,
1008–1015.
(6) Wineland, D.; Monroe, C.; Itano, W.; King, B.; Leibfried, D.; Meekhof, D.; Myatt, C.;
Wood, C. Quantum Computing; Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, 2004; pp 57–
84.
(7) Steane, A. The ion trap quantum information processor. Appl. Phys. B: Lasers Opt.
1997, 64, 623–643.
(8) Devoret, M. H.; Martinis, J. M. Experimental Aspects of Quantum Computing;
Springer US, 2005; pp 163–203.
(9) Devoret, M. H.; Wallraff, A.; Martinis, J. M. Superconducting Qubits: A Short Review. 2004, cond-mat/0411174.
(10) Wendin, G. Quantum information processing with superconducting circuits: a review.
Rep. Prog. Phys. 2017, 80, 106001.

153

(11) Gambetta, J. M.; Chow, J. M.; Steffen, M. Building logical qubits in a superconducting
quantum computing system. npj Quantum Inf. 2017, 3 .
(12) Devoret, M. H.; Schoelkopf, R. J. Superconducting Circuits for Quantum Information:
An Outlook. Science 2013, 339, 1169–1174.
(13) Kok, P.; Munro, W. J.; Nemoto, K.; Ralph, T. C.; Dowling, J. P.; Milburn, G. J.
Linear optical quantum computing with photonic qubits. Rev. Mod. Phys. 2007, 79,
135–174.
(14) Adami, C.; Cerf, N. J. In Quantum Computing and Quantum Communications;
Williams, C. P., Ed.; Springer Berlin Heidelberg: Berlin, Heidelberg, 1999; pp 391–
401.
(15) Krovi, H. Models of optical quantum computing. Nanophotonics 2017, 6 .
(16) O'Brien, J. L. Optical Quantum Computing. Science 2007, 318, 1567–1570.
(17) Doherty, M. W.; Manson, N. B.; Delaney, P.; Jelezko, F.; Wrachtrup, J.; Hollenberg, L. C. The nitrogen-vacancy colour centre in diamond. Phys. Rep. 2013, 528,
1–45.
(18) Childress, L.; Hanson, R. Diamond NV centers for quantum computing and quantum
networks. MRS Bulletin 2013, 38, 134–138.
(19) Gordon, L.; Weber, J. R.; Varley, J. B.; Janotti, A.; Awschalom, D. D.; de Walle, C.
G. V. Quantum computing with defects. MRS Bulletin 2013, 38, 802–807.
(20) Jones, J. A. In Quantum Computing and Communications; Brooks, M., Ed.; Springer
London: London, 1999; pp 71–78.
(21) Oliveira, I. S.; Bonagamba, T. J.; Sarthour, R. S.; Freitas, J. C.; deAzevedo, E. R.
In NMR Quantum Information Processing; Oliveira, I. S., Bonagamba, T. J.,
154

Sarthour, R. S., Freitas, J. C., deAzevedo, E. R., Eds.; Elsevier Science: Amsterdam,
2007; pp 137–181.
(22) Ramanathan, C.; Boulant, N.; Chen, Z.; Cory, D. G.; Chuang, I.; Steffen, M. In Experimental Aspects of Quantum Computing; Everitt, H. O., Ed.; Springer US: Boston,
MA, 2005; pp 15–44.
(23) Nayak, C.; Simon, S. H.; Stern, A.; Freedman, M.; Sarma, S. D. Non-Abelian anyons
and topological quantum computation. Rev. Mod. Phys. 2008, 80, 1083–1159.
(24) Lahtinen, V.; Pachos, J. A Short Introduction to Topological Quantum Computation.
SciPost Phys. 2017, 3 .
(25) Blatt, R.; Häffner, H.; Roos, C. F.; Becher, C.; Schmidt-Kaler, F. Experimental Aspects
of Quantum Computing; Springer US, 2015; pp 61–73.
(26) Monz, T.; Schindler, P.; Barreiro, J. T.; Chwalla, M.; Nigg, D.; Coish, W. A.; Harlander, M.; Hänsel, W.; Hennrich, M.; Blatt, R. 14-Qubit Entanglement: Creation and
Coherence. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2011, 106 .
(27) Mohseni, M.; Read, P.; Neven, H.; Boixo, S.; Denchev, V.; Babbush, R.; Fowler, A.;
Smelyanskiy, V.; Martinis, J. Commercialize quantum technologies in five years. Nature 2017, 543, 171–174.
(28) Manin, Y. Computable and Uncomputable; Sovetskoye Radio: Moscow, 1980.
(29) Feynman, R. P. Simulating physics with computers. Int. J. Theor. Phys. 1982, 21,
467–488.
(30) Benioff, P. The computer as a physical system: A microscopic quantum mechanical
Hamiltonian model of computers as represented by Turing machines. J. Stat. Phys.
1980, 22, 563–591.

155

(31) Deutsch, D. Quantum Theory the Church-Turing Principle and the Universal Quantum Computer. Proc. Royal Soc. Lond. A 1985, 400, 97–117.
(32) Shor, P. W. Polynomial time algorithms for discrete logarithms and factoring on a
quantum computer. Algorithmic Number Theory. Berlin, Heidelberg, 1994; pp 289–
289.
(33) Bernstein, E.; Vazirani, U. Quantum Complexity Theory. Proceedings of the Twentyfifth Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing. New York, NY, USA, 1993;
pp 11–20.
(34) Deutsch, D.; Jozsa, R. Rapid Solution of Problems by Quantum Computation. Proc.
Royal Soc. Lond. A 1992, 439, 553–558.
(35) Grover, L. K. A Fast Quantum Mechanical Algorithm for Database Search. Proceedings of the Twenty-eighth Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing. New
York, NY, USA, 1996; pp 212–219.
(36) Simon, D. On the power of quantum computation. Proceedings 35th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science. 1994.
(37) Lloyd, S. Universal Quantum Simulators. Science 1996, 273, 1073–1078.
(38) Abrams, D. S.; Lloyd, S. Quantum Algorithm Providing Exponential Speed Increase
for Finding Eigenvalues and Eigenvectors. Phys. Rev. Lett. 1999, 83, 5162–5165.
(39) Childs, A. M.; van Dam, W. Quantum algorithms for algebraic problems. Rev. Mod.
Phys. 2010, 82, 1–52.
(40) Wiesner, S. Simulations of Many-Body Quantum Systems by a Quantum Computer.
1996, quant-ph/9603028.
(41) Zalka, C. Efficient Simulation of Quantum Systems by Quantum Computers. Fortschr.
Phys. 1998, 46, 877–879.
156

(42) Kitaev, A.; Shen, A.; Vyalyi, M. Classical and Quantum Computation; American
Mathematical Society: Providence, Rhode Island, 2002.
(43) Ortiz, G.; Gubernatis, J. E.; Knill, E.; Laflamme, R. Quantum algorithms for fermionic
simulations. Phys. Rev. A 2001, 64 .
(44) Lidar, D. A.; Wang, H. Calculating the thermal rate constant with exponential speedup
on a quantum computer. Phys. Rev. E 1999, 59, 2429–2438.
(45) Aspuru-Guzik, A.; Dutoi, A.; Love, P. J.; Head-Gordon, M. Simulated Quantum Computation of Molecular Energies. Science 2005, 309, 1704–1707.
(46) Wang, H.; Kais, S.; Aspuru-Guzik, A.; Hoffmann, M. R. Quantum algorithm for
obtaining the energy spectrum of molecular systems. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 2008,
10, 5388.
(47) Wecker, D.; Bauer, B.; Clark, B. K.; Hastings, M. B.; Troyer, M. Gate-count estimates
for performing quantum chemistry on small quantum computers. Phys. Rev. A 2014,
90 .
(48) Hastings, M. B.; Wecker, D.; Bauer, B.; Troyer, M. Improving Quantum Algorithms
for Quantum Chemistry. Quantum Info. Comput. 2015, 15, 1–21.
(49) Poulin, D.; Hastings, M. B.; Wecker, D.; Wiebe, N.; Doberty, A. C.; Troyer, M. The
Trotter Step Size Required for Accurate Quantum Simulation of Quantum Chemistry.
Quantum Info. Comput. 2015, 15, 361–384.
(50) Babbush, R.; McClean, J.; Wecker, D.; Aspuru-Guzik, A.; Wiebe, N. Chemical basis
of Trotter-Suzuki errors in quantum chemistry simulation. Phys. Rev. A 2015, 91 .
(51) Preskill,

J.

Quantum

Computing

in

arXiv:1801.00862 [quant-ph].

157

the

NISQ

era

and

beyond.

2018,

(52) Peruzzo, A.; McClean, J.; Shadbolt, P.; Yung, M.-H.; Zhou, X.-Q.; Love, P. J.; AspuruGuzik, A.; O’Brien, J. L. A variational eigenvalue solver on a photonic quantum
processor. Nat. Commun. 2014, 5 .
(53) Shen, Y.; Zhang, X.; Zhang, S.; Zhang, J.-N.; Yung, M.-H.; Kim, K. Quantum implementation of the unitary coupled cluster for simulating molecular electronic structure.
Phys. Rev. A 2017, 95 .
(54) Wang, Y.; Dolde, F.; Biamonte, J.; Babbush, R.; Bergholm, V.; Yang, S.; Jakobi, I.;
Neumann, P.; Aspuru-Guzik, A.; Whitfield, J. D.; Wrachtrup, J. Quantum Simulation
of Helium Hydride Cation in a Solid-State Spin Register. ACS Nano 2015, 9, 7769–
7774.
(55) O’Malley, P. J. J. et al. Scalable Quantum Simulation of Molecular Energies. Phys.
Rev. X 2016, 6, 031007.
(56) Kandala, A.; Mezzacapo, A.; Temme, K.; Takita, M.; Brink, M.; Chow, J. M.; Gambetta, J. M. Hardware-efficient variational quantum eigensolver for small molecules
and quantum magnets. Nature 2017, 549, 242–246.
(57) Colless, J.; Ramasesh, V.; Dahlen, D.; Blok, M.; McClean, J.; Carter, J.;
de Jong, W. A.; Siddiqi, I. Implementing a Variational Quantum Eigensolver using
Superconducting Qubits. Quantum Information and Measurement (QIM) 2017. 2017;
p QF6A.2.
(58) Colless, J. I.; Ramasesh, V. V.; Dahlen, D.; Blok, M. S.; Kimchi-Schwartz, M. E.;
McClean, J. R.; Carter, J.; de Jong, W. A.; Siddiqi, I. Computation of Molecular
Spectra on a Quantum Processor with an Error-Resilient Algorithm. Phys. Rev. X
2018, 8, 011021.
(59) Hempel, C.; Maier, C.; Romero, J.; McClean, J.; Monz, T.; Shen, H.; Jurcevic, P.;
Lanyon, B. P.; Love, P.; Babbush, R.; Aspuru-Guzik, A.; Blatt, R.; Roos, C. F.
158

Quantum Chemistry Calculations on a Trapped-Ion Quantum Simulator. Phys. Rev.
X 2018, 8, 031022.
(60) Farhi, E.; Goldstone, J.; Gutmann, S.; Sipser, M. Quantum Computation by Adiabatic
Evolution. 2000, quant-ph/0001106.
(61) Albash, T.; Lidar, D. A. Adiabatic quantum computation. Rev. Mod. Phys. 2018, 90 .
(62) Aharonov, D.; van Dam, W.; Kempe, J.; Landau, Z.; Lloyd, S.; Regev, O. Adiabatic Quantum Computation is Equivalent to Standard Quantum Computation. 45th
Annual IEEE Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science. 2004.
(63) Aaronson, S.; Arkhipov, A. The Computational Complexity of Linear Optics. Proceedings of the Forty-third Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing. New
York, New York, 2011; pp 333–342.
(64) Arkhipov, A.; Aaronson, S. The Computational Complexity of Linear Optics. Quantum Information and Measurement 2014. Messe Berlin, Berlin, 2014.
(65) Schuch, N.; Verstraete, F. Computational complexity of interacting electrons and fundamental limitations of density functional theory. Nat. Phys. 2009, 5, 732–735.
(66) Liu, Y.-K.; Christandl, M.; Verstraete, F. Quantum Computational Complexity of the
N-Representability Problem: QMA Complete. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2007, 98 .
(67) Brown, B.; Flammia, S. T.; Schuch, N. Computational Difficulty of Computing the
Density of States. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2011, 107 .
(68) Whitfield, J. D.; Love, P. J.; Aspuru-Guzik, A. Computational complexity in electronic
structure. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 2013, 15, 397–411.
(69) Kohn, W. Nobel Lecture: Electronic structure of matter—wave functions and density
functionals. Rev. Mod. Phys. 1999, 71, 1253–1266.
159

(70) Markland, T. E.; Ceriotti, M. Nuclear quantum effects enter the mainstream. Nat.
Rev. Chem. 2018, 2, 0109.
(71) Bubin,

S.;

Pavanello,

M.;

Tung,

W.-C.;

Sharkey,

K.;

Adamowicz,

L.

Born–Oppenheimer and Non-Born–Oppenheimer, Atomic and Molecular Calculations
with Explicitly Correlated Gaussians. Chem. Rev. 2013, 113, 36–79.
(72) Nakai, H. Nuclear orbital plus molecular orbital theory: Simultaneous determination
of nuclear and electronic wave functions without Born–Oppenheimer approximation.
Int. J. Quantum Chem. 2007, 107 .
(73) Ishimoto, T.; Tachikawa, M.; Nagashima, U. Review of multicomponent molecular
orbital method for direct treatment of nuclear quantum effect. Int. J. Quantum Chem.
2009, 109 .
(74) Veis, L.; Višňák, J.; Nishizawa, H.; Nakai, H.; Pittner, J. Quantum chemistry beyond Born–Oppenheimer approximation on a quantum computer: A simulated phase
estimation study. Int. J. Quantum Chem. 116, 1328–1336.
(75) Kassal, I.; Jordan, S. P.; Love, P. J.; Mohseni, M.; Aspuru-Guzik, A. Polynomial-time
quantum algorithm for the simulation of chemical dynamics. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
2008, 105, 18681–18686.
(76) Kivlichan, I. D.; Wiebe, N.; Babbush, R.; Aspuru-Guzik, A. Bounding the costs of
quantum simulation of many-body physics in real space. J. Phys. A 2017, 50, 305301.
(77) Hohenberg, P.; Kohn, W. Inhomogeneous Electron Gas. Phys. Rev. 1964, 136, B864–
B871.
(78) Kohn, W.; Sham, L. J. Self-Consistent Equations Including Exchange and Correlation
Effects. Phys. Rev. 1965, 140, A1133–A1138.

160

(79) Helgaker, T.; Jørgensen, P.; Olsen, J. Molecular Electronic-Structure Theory; John
Wiley & Sons Ltd: Hoboken, New Jersey, 2000.
(80) Fan, P.-D.; Piecuch, P. In The Usefulness of Exponential Wave Function Expansions
Employing One- and Two-Body Cluster Operators in Electronic Structure Theory:
The Extended and Generalized Coupled-Cluster Methods; Sabin, J., Brändas, E., Eds.;
Advances in Quantum Chemistry; Academic Press, 2006; Vol. 51; pp 1 – 57.
(81) Bulik, I. W.; Henderson, T. M.; Scuseria, G. E. Can Single-Reference Coupled Cluster
Theory Describe Static Correlation? J. Chem. Theory Comput. 2015, 11, 3171–3179,
PMID: 26575754.
(82) Kowalski, K.; Piecuch, P. The method of moments of coupled-cluster equations and
the renormalized CCSD[T], CCSD(T), CCSD(TQ), and CCSDT(Q) approaches. J.
Chem. Phys. 2000, 113, 18–35.
(83) Degroote, M.; Henderson, T. M.; Zhao, J.; Dukelsky, J.; Scuseria, G. E. Polynomial
similarity transformation theory: A smooth interpolation between coupled cluster
doubles and projected BCS applied to the reduced BCS Hamiltonian. Phys. Rev. B
2016, 93, 125124.
(84) Pal, S.; Prasad, M. D.; Mukherjee, D. On certain correspondences among various
coupled-cluster theories for closed-shell systems. Pramana 1982, 18, 261–270.
(85) Cooper, B.; Knowles, P. J. Benchmark studies of variational unitary and extended
coupled cluster methods. J. Chem. Phys. 2010, 133, 234102.
(86) Voorhis, T. V.; Head-Gordon, M. Benchmark variational coupled cluster doubles results. J. Chem. Phys. 2000, 113, 8873–8879.
(87) Evangelista, F. A. Alternative single-reference coupled cluster approaches for multireference problems: The simpler the better. J. Chem. Phys. 2011, 134, 224102.
161

(88) Harsha, G.; Shiozaki, T.; Scuseria, G. E. On the difference between variational and
unitary coupled cluster theories. J. Chem. Phys. 2018, 148, 044107.
(89) Taube, A. G.; Bartlett, R. J. New perspectives on unitary coupled-cluster theory. Int.
J. Quantum Chem. 2006, 106, 3393–3401.
(90) Nooijen, M. Can the Eigenstates of a Many-Body Hamiltonian Be Represented Exactly
Using a General Two-Body Cluster Expansion? Phys. Rev. Lett. 2000, 84, 2108–2111.
(91) Heinrich, S. From Monte Carlo to quantum computation. Math Comput Simul. 2003,
62, 219–230.
(92) Sherrill, C. D.; Schaefer, H. F. Adv. Quantum Chem.; Elsevier, 1999; pp 143–269.
(93) Knowles, P. J.; Handy, N. C. Unlimited full configuration interaction calculations. J.
Chem. Phys. 1989, 91, 2396–2398.
(94) Thøgersen, L.; Olsen, J. A coupled cluster and full configuration interaction study of
CN and CN-. Chem. Phys. Lett. 2004, 393, 36–43.
(95) Ansaloni, R.; Bendazzoli, G. L.; Evangelisti, S.; Rossi, E. A parallel Full-CI algorithm.
Comput. Phys. Commun. 2000, 128, 496–515.
(96) Rolik, Z.; Szabados, Á.; Surján, P. R. A sparse matrix based full-configuration interaction algorithm. J. Chem. Phys. 2008, 128, 144101.
(97) Rossi, E.; Bendazzoli, G. L.; Evangelisti, S. Full configuration interaction algorithm
on a massively parallel architecture: Direct-list implementation. J. Comput. Chem.
1998, 19, 658–672.
(98) Harrison, R.; Stahlberg, E. Massively parallel full configuration interaction. Benchmark electronic structure calculations on the Intel Touchstone Delta; 1994.

162

(99) Abrams, D. S.; Lloyd, S. Simulation of Many-Body Fermi Systems on a Universal
Quantum Computer. Phys. Rev. Lett. 1997, 79, 2586–2589.
(100) Szalay, S.; Pfeffer, M.; Murg, V.; Barcza, G.; Verstraete, F.; Schneider, R.; Legeza, O.
Tensor product methods and entanglement optimization for ab initio quantum chemistry. Int. J. Quantum Chem. 2015, 115, 1342–1391.
(101) White, S. R. Density matrix formulation for quantum renormalization groups. Phys.
Rev. Lett. 1992, 69, 2863–2866.
(102) White, S. R. Density-matrix algorithms for quantum renormalization groups. Phys.
Rev. B 1993, 48, 10345–10356.
(103) White, S. R.; Martin, R. L. Ab initio quantum chemistry using the density matrix
renormalization group. J. Chem. Phys. 1999, 110, 4127–4130.
(104) Chan, G. K.-L.; Head-Gordon, M. Highly correlated calculations with a polynomial
cost algorithm: A study of the density matrix renormalization group. J. Chem. Phys.
2002, 116, 4462–4476.
(105) Legeza, O.; Röder, J.; Hess, B. A. Controlling the accuracy of the density-matrix
renormalization-group method: The dynamical block state selection approach. Phys.
Rev. B 2003, 67 .
(106) Chan, G. K.-L.; Sharma, S. The Density Matrix Renormalization Group in Quantum
Chemistry. Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem. 2011, 62, 465–481.
(107) Wouters, S.; Neck, D. V. The density matrix renormalization group for ab initio quantum chemistry. Eur. Phys. J. D 2014, 68 .
(108) Yanai, T.; Kurashige, Y.; Mizukami, W.; Chalupský, J.; Lan, T. N.; Saitow, M.
Density matrix renormalization group for ab initio calculations and associated dynamic

163

correlation methods: A review of theory and applications. Int. J. Quantum Chem.
2014, 115, 283–299.
(109) Marti, K. H.; Reiher, M. The Density Matrix Renormalization Group Algorithm in
Quantum Chemistry. Z. Phys. Chem. 2010, 224, 583–599.
(110) Schollwöck, U. The density-matrix renormalization group in the age of matrix product
states. Ann. Phys. 2011, 326, 96–192.
(111) Eisert, J.; Cramer, M.; Plenio, M. B. Colloquium: Area laws for the entanglement
entropy. Rev. Mod. Phys. 2010, 82, 277–306.
(112) Moritz, G.; Hess, B. A.; Reiher, M. Convergence behavior of the density-matrix renormalization group algorithm for optimized orbital orderings. J. Chem. Phys. 2005, 122,
024107.
(113) Barcza, G.; Legeza, O.; Marti, K. H.; Reiher, M. Quantum-information analysis of
electronic states of different molecular structures. Phys. Rev. A 2011, 83 .
(114) Krumnow, C.; Veis, L.; Legeza, O.; Eisert, J. Fermionic Orbital Optimization in Tensor
Network States. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2016, 117 .
(115) Olivares-Amaya, R.; Hu, W.; Nakatani, N.; Sharma, S.; Yang, J.; Chan, G. K.-L. The
ab-initio density matrix renormalization group in practice. J. Chem. Phys. 2015, 142,
034102.
(116) Olsen, J. The CASSCF method: A perspective and commentary. Int. J. Quantum
Chem. 2011, 111, 3267–3272.
(117) Chan, G. K.-L.; Kállay, M.; Gauss, J. State-of-the-art density matrix renormalization
group and coupled cluster theory studies of the nitrogen binding curve. J. Chem. Phys.
2004, 121, 6110–6116.

164

(118) Hachmann, J.; Cardoen, W.; Chan, G. K.-L. Multireference correlation in long
molecules with the quadratic scaling density matrix renormalization group. J. Chem.
Phys. 2006, 125, 144101.
(119) Neuscamman, E.; Yanai, T.; Chan, G. K.-L. A review of canonical transformation
theory. Int. Rev. Phys. Chem. 2010, 29, 231–271.
(120) Kurashige, Y.; Yanai, T. Second-order perturbation theory with a density matrix
renormalization group self-consistent field reference function: Theory and application
to the study of chromium dimer. J. Chem. Phys. 2011, 135, 094104.
(121) Saitow, M.; Kurashige, Y.; Yanai, T. Multireference configuration interaction theory
using cumulant reconstruction with internal contraction of density matrix renormalization group wave function. J. Chem. Phys. 2013, 139, 044118.
(122) Sharma, S.; Chan, G. K.-L. Communication: A flexible multi-reference perturbation
theory by minimizing the Hylleraas functional with matrix product states. J. Chem.
Phys. 2014, 141, 111101.
(123) Jeanmairet, G.; Sharma, S.; Alavi, A. Stochastic multi-reference perturbation theory
with application to the linearized coupled cluster method. J. Chem. Phys. 2017, 146,
044107.
(124) Yanai, T.; Saitow, M.; Xiong, X.-G.; Chalupský, J.; Kurashige, Y.; Guo, S.; Sharma, S.
Multistate Complete-Active-Space Second-Order Perturbation Theory Based on Density Matrix Renormalization Group Reference States. J. Chem. Theory Comput. 2017,
13, 4829–4840.
(125) Freitag, L.; Knecht, S.; Angeli, C.; Reiher, M. Multireference Perturbation Theory with Cholesky Decomposition for the Density Matrix Renormalization Group.
J. Chem. Theory Comput. 2017, 13, 451–459.

165

(126) Hedegård, E. D.; Knecht, S.; Kielberg, J. S.; Jensen, H. J. A.; Reiher, M. Density
matrix renormalization group with efficient dynamical electron correlation through
range separation. J. Chem. Phys. 2015, 142, 224108.
(127) Veis, L.; Antalı́k, A.; Brabec, J.; Neese, F.; Legeza, O.; Pittner, J. Coupled Cluster
Method with Single and Double Excitations Tailored by Matrix Product State Wave
Functions. J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 2016, 7, 4072–4078.
(128) Orús, R. A practical introduction to tensor networks: Matrix product states and
projected entangled pair states. Ann. Phys. 2014, 349, 117–158.
(129) Verstraete, F.; Cirac, J. I. Renormalization algorithms for Quantum-Many Body Systems in two and higher dimensions. 2004, cond-mat/0407066.
(130) Shi, Y.-Y.; Duan, L.-M.; Vidal, G. Classical simulation of quantum many-body systems with a tree tensor network. Phys. Rev. A 2006, 74 .
(131) Murg, V.; Verstraete, F.; Legeza, O.; Noack, R. M. Simulating strongly correlated
quantum systems with tree tensor networks. Phys. Rev. B 2010, 82 .
(132) Nakatani, N.; Chan, G. K.-L. Efficient tree tensor network states (TTNS) for quantum
chemistry: Generalizations of the density matrix renormalization group algorithm. J.
Chem. Phys. 2013, 138, 134113.
(133) Murg, V.; Verstraete, F.; Schneider, R.; Nagy, P. R.; Legeza, O. Tree Tensor Network
State with Variable Tensor Order: An Efficient Multireference Method for Strongly
Correlated Systems. J. Chem. Theory Comput. 2015, 11, 1027–1036.
(134) Gunst, K.; Verstraete, F.; Wouters, S.; Legeza, O.; Neck, D. V. T3NS: three-legged
tree tensor network states. J. Chem Theory Comput. 2018, 14, 2026–2033.
(135) Evenbly, G.; Vidal, G. Class of Highly Entangled Many-Body States that can be
Efficiently Simulated. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2014, 112 .
166

(136) Marti, K. H.; Bauer, B.; Reiher, M.; Troyer, M.; Verstraete, F. Complete-graph tensor
network states: a new fermionic wave function ansatz for molecules. New J. Phys.
2010, 12, 103008.
(137) Kovyrshin, A.; Reiher, M. Self-adaptive tensor network states with multi-site correlators. J. Chem. Phys. 2017, 147, 214111.
(138) Vidal, G. Efficient Classical Simulation of Slightly Entangled Quantum Computations.
Phys. Rev. Lett. 2003, 91 .
(139) Legeza, O.; Sólyom, J. Quantum data compression, quantum information generation,
and the density-matrix renormalization-group method. Phys. Rev. B 2004, 70 .
(140) Leach, A. Molecular Modelling: Principles and Applications (2nd Edition); Pearson:
Boston, Massachusetts, 2001.
(141) Barnett, R. N.; Landman, U. Born-Oppenheimer molecular-dynamics simulations of
finite systems: Structure and dynamics of (H2O)2. Phys. Rev. B 1993, 48, 2081–2097.
(142) Car, R.; Parrinello, M. Unified Approach for Molecular Dynamics and DensityFunctional Theory. Phys. Rev. Lett. 1985, 55, 2471–2474.
(143) Zillich, R. E.; Paesani, F.; Kwon, Y.; Whaley, K. B. Path integral methods for rotating
molecules in superfluids. J. Chem. Phys. 2005, 123, 114301.
(144) Paesani, F.; Voth, G. A. The Properties of Water: Insights from Quantum Simulations.
J. Phys. Chem. B 2009, 113, 5702–5719.
(145) Tuckerman, M. E. Statistical Mechanics: Theory and Molecular Simulation; Oxford
University Press: Oxford, 2010.
(146) Berne, B. J.; Thirumalai, D. On the Simulation of Quantum Systems: Path Integral
Methods. Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem. 1986, 37, 401–424.
167

(147) Cao, J.; Voth, G. A. The formulation of quantum statistical mechanics based on the
Feynman path centroid density. II. Dynamical properties. J. Chem. Phys. 1994, 100,
5106–5117.
(148) Habershon, S.; Manolopoulos, D. E.; Markland, T. E.; Miller, T. F. Ring-Polymer
Molecular Dynamics: Quantum Effects in Chemical Dynamics from Classical Trajectories in an Extended Phase Space. Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem. 2013, 64, 387–413.
(149) Petrenko, R.; Meller, J. Molecular Dynamics; John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.: Hoboken,
New Jersey, 2010.
(150) Tannor, D. J. Introduction to Quantum Mechanics: A Time-Dependent Perspective;
University Science Books: Sausalito, California, 2007.
(151) Moler, C.; Loan, C. V. Nineteen Dubious Ways to Compute the Exponential of a
Matrix Twenty-Five Years Later. SIAM Rev. 2003, 45, 3–49.
(152) Bardsley, J. N.; Sundaram, B.; Pinnaduwage, L. A.; Bayfield, J. E. Quantum Dynamics
for Driven Weakly Bound Electrons near the Threshold for Classical Chaos. Phys. Rev.
Lett. 1986, 56, 1007–1010.
(153) Bruderer, M.; Contreras-Pulido, L. D.; Thaller, M.; Sironi, L.; Obreschkow, D.; Plenio, M. B. Inverse counting statistics for stochastic and open quantum systems: the
characteristic polynomial approach. New J. Phys. 2014, 16, 033030.
(154) Sidje, R. B. Expokit: a software package for computing matrix exponentials. ACM
Trans Math Softw. 1998, 24, 130–156.
(155) Schomerus, H.; Tworzydlo, J. Quantum-to-Classical Crossover of Quasibound States
in Open Quantum Systems. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2004, 93, 154102.

168

(156) Chen, X.; Batista, V. S. Matching-pursuit/split-operator-Fourier-transform simulations of excited-state nonadiabatic quantum dynamics in pyrazine. J. Chem. Phys.
2006, 125, 124313.
(157) Sawaya, N. P. D.; Huh, J.; Fujita, T.; Saikin, S. K.; Aspuru-Guzik, A. Fast Delocalization Leads To Robust Long-Range Excitonic Transfer in a Large Quantum Chlorosome
Model. Nano Lett. 2015, 15, 1722–1729.
(158) Runge, E.; Gross, E. K. U. Density-Functional Theory for Time-Dependent Systems.
Phys. Rev. Lett. 1984, 52, 997–1000.
(159) Burke, K.; Werschnik, J.; Gross, E. K. U. Time-dependent density functional theory:
Past present, and future. J. Chem. Phys. 2005, 123, 062206.
(160) Casida, M. E. Time-dependent density-functional theory for molecules and molecular
solids. J. Mol. Struct.: THEOCHEM 2009, 914, 3–18.
(161) Casida, M. E. Recent Advances in Density Functional Methods; World Scientific, 1995;
pp 155–192.
(162) Nakatani, N.; Wouters, S.; Neck, D. V.; Chan, G. K.-L. Linear response theory for
the density matrix renormalization group: Efficient algorithms for strongly correlated
excited states. J. Chem. Phys. 2014, 140, 024108.
(163) Dorando, J. J.; Hachmann, J.; Chan, G. K.-L. Analytic response theory for the density
matrix renormalization group. J. Chem. Phys. 2009, 130, 184111.
(164) Monkhorst, H. J. Calculation of properties with the coupled-cluster method. Int. J.
Quantum Chem. 2009, 12, 421–432.
(165) Dalgaard, E.; Monkhorst, H. J. Some aspects of the time-dependent coupled-cluster
approach to dynamic response functions. Phys. Rev. A 1983, 28, 1217–1222.

169

(166) Pedersen, T. B.; Koch, H. Coupled cluster response functions revisited. J. Chem. Phys.
1997, 106, 8059–8072.
(167) Dirac, P. A. M. Note on Exchange Phenomena in the Thomas Atom. Math. Proc.
Cambridge Philos. Soc. 1930, 26, 376.
(168) Haegeman, J.; Osborne, T. J.; Verstraete, F. Post-matrix product state methods: To
tangent space and beyond. Phys. Rev. B 2013, 88 .
(169) McLachlan, A. A variational solution of the time-dependent Schrodinger equation.
Mol. Phys. 1964, 8, 39–44.
(170) Carleo, G.; Becca, F.; Schiró, M.; Fabrizio, M. Localization and Glassy Dynamics Of
Many-Body Quantum Systems. Sci. Rep. 2012, 2 .
(171) Ido, K.; Ohgoe, T.; Imada, M. Time-dependent many-variable variational Monte Carlo
method for nonequilibrium strongly correlated electron systems. Phys. Rev. B 2015,
92 .
(172) Haegeman, J.; Cirac, J. I.; Osborne, T. J.; Pižorn, I.; Verschelde, H.; Verstraete, F.
Time-Dependent Variational Principle for Quantum Lattices. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2011,
107 .
(173) Vidal, G. Efficient Simulation of One-Dimensional Quantum Many-Body Systems.
Phys. Rev. Lett. 2004, 93 .
(174) Schollwöck, U. Methods for Time Dependence in DMRG. AIP Conference Proceedings.
2006.
(175) Manthe, U.; Meyer, H.-D.; Cederbaum, L. S. Wave-packet dynamics within the multiconfiguration Hartree framework: General aspects and application to NOCl. J. Chem.
Phys. 1992, 97, 3199–3213.

170

(176) Wu, Y.; Batista, V. S. Matching-pursuit for simulations of quantum processes. J.
Chem. Phys. 2003, 118, 6720–6724.
(177) Ben-Nun, M.; Martinez, T. J. Nonadiabatic molecular dynamics: Validation of the
multiple spawning method for a multidimensional problem. J. Chem. Phys. 1998,
108, 7244–7257.
(178) Crespo-Otero, R.; Barbatti, M. Recent Advances and Perspectives on Nonadiabatic
Mixed Quantum–Classical Dynamics. Chem. Rev. 2018, 118, 7026–7068, PMID:
29767966.
(179) Matsika, S.; Krause, P. Nonadiabatic Events and Conical Intersections. Annu. Rev.
Phys. Chem. 2011, 62, 621–643.
(180) Kitaev, S. B. B. A. Y. Fermionic Quantum Computation. Ann. Phys. 2002, 298 .
(181) Seeley, J. T.; Richard, M. J.; Love, P. J. The Bravyi-Kitaev transformation for quantum computation of electronic structure. J. Chem. Phys. 2012, 137, 224109.
(182) von Neumann, J. Mathematical foundations of quantum mechanics, translation - from
german ed.; Princeton University Press: Princeton, New Jersey, 1949.
(183) Brassard, G.; Hø yer, P.; Mosca, M.; Tapp, A. Quantum computation and information;
Contemp. Math.; American Mathematical Society: Providence, Rhode Island, 2002;
Vol. 305; pp 53–74.
(184) Freitas, N.; Morigi, G.; Dunjko, V. Neural Network Operations and Susuki-Trotter
evolution of Neural Network States. 2018, arXiv:1803.02118 [quant-ph].
(185) Cohen, G.; Gull, E.; Reichman, D. R.; Millis, A. J. Taming the Dynamical Sign
Problem in Real-Time Evolution of Quantum Many-Body Problems. Phys. Rev. Lett.
2015, 115 .

171

(186) Whitfield, J. D.; Biamonte, J.; Aspuru-Guzik, A. Simulation of electronic structure
Hamiltonians using quantum computers. Mol. Phys. 2011, 109, 735–750.
(187) Berry, D. W.; Childs, A. M.; Cleve, R.; Kothari, R.; Somma, R. D. Exponential
Improvement in Precision for Simulating Sparse Hamiltonians. Proceedings of the
Forty-sixth Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing. New York, NY, USA,
2014; pp 283–292.
(188) Berry, D. W.; Childs, A. M.; Cleve, R.; Kothari, R.; Somma, R. D. Simulating hamiltonian dynamics with a truncated taylor series. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2015, 114 .
(189) Low, G. H.; Chuang, I. L. Hamiltonian Simulation by Qubitization. 2016,
arXiv:1610.06546 [quant-ph].
(190) Low, G. H.; Chuang, I. L. Optimal Hamiltonian Simulation by Quantum Signal Processing. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2017, 118, 010501.
(191) Babbush, R.; Berry, D. W.; Sanders, Y. R.; Kivlichan, I. D.; Scherer, A.; Wei, A. Y.;
Love, P. J.; Aspuru-Guzik, A. Exponentially more precise quantum simulation of
fermions in the configuration interaction representation. Quantum Sci. Technol. 2018,
3, 015006.
(192) Babbush, R.; Berry, D. W.; Kivlichan, I. D.; Wei, A. Y.; Love, P. J.; Aspuru-Guzik, A.
Exponentially more precise quantum simulation of fermions in second quantization.
New J. Phys. 2016, 18, 033032.
(193) Wang, H.; Ashhab, S.; Nori, F. Quantum algorithm for simulating the dynamics of an
open quantum system. Phys. Rev. A 2011, 83 .
(194) Childs, A. M.; Li, T. Efficient simulation of sparse Markovian quantum dynamics.
Quantum Inf. Comput. 2017, 17, 901–947.

172

(195) Cleve, R.; Wang, C. Efficient Quantum Algorithms for Simulating Lindblad Evolution.
2016, arXiv:1612.09512 [quant-ph].
(196) Wiebe, N.; Berry, D.; Høyer, P.; Sanders, B. C. Higher order decompositions of ordered
operator exponentials. J. Phys. A 2010, 43, 065203.
(197) Low, G. H.; Wiebe, N. Hamiltonian Simulation in the Interaction Picture. 2018,
arXiv:1805.00675 [quant-ph].
(198) Babbush, R.; Berry, D. W.; McClean, J. R.; Neven, H. Quantum Simulation of
Chemistry with Sublinear Scaling to the Continuum. 2018, arXiv:1807.09802
[quant-ph].
(199) Kieferova, M.; Scherer, A.; Berry, D. Simulating the dynamics of time-dependent
Hamiltonians with a truncated Dyson series. 2018, arXiv:1805.00582 [quant-ph].
(200) Li, Y.; Benjamin, S. C. Efficient variational quantum simulator incorporating active
error minimization. Phys. Rev. X 2017, 7, 021050.
(201) Dirac, P. A. M. The Principles of Quantum Mechanics; Oxford University Press:
Oxford, 1930.
(202) Frenkel, J. Wave Mechanics: Advanced General Theory; Oxford University Press:
Oxford, 1934.
(203) Institute,

C.

M.

P

vs

NP

Problem

—

Clay

Mathematics

Institute.

http://www.claymath.org/millennium-problems/p-vs-np-problem,
//www.claymath.org/millennium-problems/p-vs-np-problem,

http:
Accessed

on

Tue, June 26, 2018.
(204) Aaronson, S. BQP and the Polynomial Hierarchy. Proceedings of the Forty-second
ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing. New York, NY, 2010; pp 141–150.

173

(205) Osborne, T. J. Hamiltonian complexity. Rep. Prog. Phys. 2012, 75, 022001.
(206) Gharibian, S.; Huang, Y.; Landau, Z.; Shin, S. W. Quantum Hamiltonian Complexity.
FnT-TCS 2015, 10, 159–282.
(207) Oliveira, R.; Terhal, B. M. The Complexity of Quantum Spin Systems on a Twodimensional Square Lattice. Quantum Info. Comput. 2008, 8, 900–924.
(208) Biamonte, J. D.; Love, P. J. Realizable Hamiltonians for universal adiabatic quantum
computers. Phys. Rev. A 2008, 78 .
(209) Barahona, F. On the computational complexity of Ising spin glass models. J. Phys. A
1982, 15, 3241–3253.
(210) Childs, A. M.; Gosset, D.; Webb, Z. Automata Languages, and Programming; Springer
Berlin Heidelberg: Berlin, Heidelberg, 2014; pp 308–319.
(211) Bookatz, A. D. QMA-complete Problems. Quantum Info. Comput. 2014, 14, 361–383.
(212) Rassolov, V. A.; Garashchuk, S. Computational complexity in quantum chemistry.
Chem. Phys. Lett. 2008, 464, 262–264.
(213) Whitfield, J. D.; Zimborás, Z. On the NP-completeness of the Hartree-Fock method
for translationally invariant systems. J. Chem. Phys. 2014, 141, 234103.
(214) Mazziotti, D. A. Parametrization of the Two-Electron Reduced Density Matrix for its
Direct Calculation without the Many-Electron Wave Function. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2008,
101 .
(215) Mazziotti, D. A. Parametrization of the two-electron reduced density matrix for its
direct calculation without the many-electron wave function: Generalizations and applications. Phys. Rev. A 2010, 81 .

174

(216) McClean, J. R.; Romero, J.; Babbush, R.; Aspuru-Guzik, A. The theory of variational
hybrid quantum-classical algorithms. New J. Phys. 2016, 18, 023023.
(217) Whitfield, J. D.; Yung, M.-H.; Tempel, D. G.; Boixo, S.; Aspuru-Guzik, A. Computational complexity of time-dependent density functional theory. New J. Phys. 2014,
16, 083035.
(218) Franck, J.; Dymond, E. G. Elementary processes of photochemical reactions. Trans.
Faraday Soc. 1926, 21, 536.
(219) Duschinsky, F. The importance of the electron spectrum in multi atomic molecules.
Concerning the Franck-Condon principle. Acta Physicochim. URSS 1937, 7 .
(220) Doktorov, E.; Malkin, I.; Man'ko, V. Dynamical symmetry of vibronic transitions in
polyatomic molecules and the Franck-Condon principle. J. Mol. Spectrosc. 1977, 64,
302–326.
(221) Ma, X.; Rhodes, W. Multimode squeeze operators and squeezed states. Phys. Rev. A
1990, 41, 4625–4631.
(222) Valiant, L. The complexity of computing the permanent. Theor. Comput. Sci. 1979,
8, 189–201.
(223) Ryser, H. J. Combinatorial Mathematics; Mathematical Association of America, 1963.
(224) Gard, B. T.; Motes, K. R.; Olson, J. P.; Rohde, P. P.; Dowling, J. P. From Atomic to
Mesoscale; Chapter Chapter 8, pp 167–192.
(225) Seshadreesan, K. P.; Olson, J. P.; Motes, K. R.; Rohde, P. P.; Dowling, J. P. Boson
sampling with displaced single-photon Fock states versus single-photon-added coherent states: The quantum-classical divide and computational-complexity transitions in
linear optics. Phys. Rev. A 2015, 91, 022334.

175

(226) Olson, J.; Seshadreesan, K.; Motes, K.; Rohde, P.; Dowling, J. Sampling arbitrary
photon-added or photon-subtracted squeezed states is in the same complexity class as
boson sampling. Phys. Rev. A 2015, 91, 022317.
(227) Lund, A. P.; Laing, A.; Rahimi-Keshari, S.; Rudolph, T.; O’Brien, J. L.; Ralph, T. C.
Boson Sampling from a Gaussian State. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2014, 113, 100502.
(228) Huh, J.; Yung, M.-H. Vibronic Boson Sampling: Generalized Gaussian Boson Sampling for Molecular Vibronic Spectra at Finite Temperature. Sci. Rep. 2017, 7, 7462.
(229) Sattasathuchana, T.; Murri, R.; Baldridge, K. An Efficient Analytic Approach for Calculation of Multi-Dimensional Franck–Condon Factors and Associated Photoelectron
Spectra. J. Chem. Theory Comput. 2017, 13, 2147–2158.
(230) Feynman, R. P. Quantum Mechanical Computers. Opt. Photonics News 1985, 11,
11–20.
(231) Kitaev, A. Y. Quantum measurements and the Abelian Stabilizer Problem. 1995,
quant-ph/9511026.
(232) Clader, B. D.; Jacobs, B. C.; Sprouse, C. R. Preconditioned quantum linear system
algorithm. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2013, 110, 250504.
(233) Sugisaki, K.; Yamamoto, S.; Nakazawa, S.; Toyota, K.; Sato, K.; Shiomi, D.; Takui, T.
Quantum Chemistry on Quantum Computers: A Polynomial-Time Quantum Algorithm for Constructing the Wave Functions of Open-Shell Molecules. J. Phys. Chem.
A 2016, 120, 6459–6466.
(234) Lanyon, B. P.; Whitfield, J. D.; Gillett, G. G.; Goggin, M. E.; Almeida, M. P.; Kassal, I.; Biamonte, J. D.; Mohseni, M.; Powell, B. J.; Barbieri, M.; Aspuru-Guzik, A.;
White, A. G. Towards quantum chemistry on a quantum computer. Nat. Chem. 2010,
2, 106–111.
176

(235) Du, J.; Xu, N.; Peng, X.; Wang, P.; Wu, S.; Lu, D. NMR Implementation of a Molecular Hydrogen Quantum Simulation with Adiabatic State Preparation. Phys. Rev. Lett.
2010, 104 .
(236) Dolde, F.; Bergholm, V.; Wang, Y.; Jakobi, I.; Naydenov, B.; Pezzagna, S.; Meijer, J.;
Jelezko, F.; Neumann, P.; Schulte-Herbrüggen, T.; Biamonte, J.; Wrachtrup, J. Highfidelity spin entanglement using optimal control. Nat. Commun. 2014, 5 .
(237) Fowler, A. G.; Mariantoni, M.; Martinis, J. M.; Cleland, A. N. Surface codes: Towards
practical large-scale quantum computation. Phys. Rev. A 2012, 86, 032324.
(238) Gottesman, D. An Introduction to Quantum Error Correction and Fault-Tolerant
Quantum Computation. 2009, arXiv:0904.2557 [quant-ph].
(239) Aharonov, D.; Ben-Or, M. Fault-tolerant Quantum Computation with Constant Error.
Proceedings of the Twenty-ninth Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing.
New York, NY, USA, 1997; pp 176–188.
(240) Harrow, A. W.; Hassidim, A.; Lloyd, S. Quantum algorithm for linear systems of
equations. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2009, 103, 150502.
(241) Narayan Chowdhury, A.; Somma, R. D. Quantum algorithms for Gibbs sampling and
hitting-time estimation. 2016, arXiv:1603.02940 [quant-ph].
(242) Wiebe, N.; Braun, D.; Lloyd, S. Quantum algorithm for data fitting. Phys. Rev. Lett.
2012, 109, 050505.
(243) Lloyd, S.; Mohseni, M.; Rebentrost, P. Quantum principal component analysis. Nat.
Phys. 2014, 10, 631.
(244) Rebentrost, P.; Mohseni, M.; Lloyd, S. Quantum support vector machine for big data
classification. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2014, 113, 130503.

177

(245) Islam, R.; Senko, C.; Campbell, W.; Korenblit, S.; Smith, J.; Lee, A.; Edwards, E.;
Wang, C.-C.; Freericks, J.; Monroe, C. Emergence and frustration of magnetism with
variable-range interactions in a quantum simulator. Science 2013, 340, 583–587.
(246) Choi, J.-y.; Hild, S.; Zeiher, J.; Schauß, P.; Rubio-Abadal, A.; Yefsah, T.; Khemani, V.;
Huse, D. A.; Bloch, I.; Gross, C. Exploring the many-body localization transition in
two dimensions. Science 2016, 352, 1547–1552.
(247) Zhang, J.; Pagano, G.; Hess, P. W.; Kyprianidis, A.; Becker, P.; Kaplan, H.; Gorshkov, A. V.; Gong, Z.-X.; Monroe, C. Observation of a many-body dynamical phase
transition with a 53-qubit quantum simulator. Nature 2017, 551, 601.
(248) Mazurenko, A.; Chiu, C. S.; Ji, G.; Parsons, M. F.; Kanász-Nagy, M.; Schmidt, R.;
Grusdt, F.; Demler, E.; Greif, D.; Greiner, M. A cold-atom Fermi–Hubbard antiferromagnet. Nature 2017, 545, 462.
(249) Bernien, H.; Schwartz, S.; Keesling, A.; Levine, H.; Omran, A.; Pichler, H.; Choi, S.;
Zibrov, A. S.; Endres, M.; Greiner, M.; Vuletić, V.; Luking, M. D. Probing many-body
dynamics on a 51-atom quantum simulator. Nature 2017, 551, 579.
(250) Childs, A. M. Quantum information processing in continuous time. Ph.D. thesis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 2004.
(251) Dodd, J. L.; Nielsen, M. A.; Bremner, M. J.; Thew, R. T. Universal quantum computation and simulation using any entangling Hamiltonian and local unitaries. Phys.
Rev. A 2002, 65, 040301.
(252) Nielsen, M. A.; Bremner, M. J.; Dodd, J. L.; Childs, A. M.; Dawson, C. M. Universal
simulation of Hamiltonian dynamics for quantum systems with finite-dimensional state
spaces. Phys. Rev. A 2002, 66, 022317.

178

(253) Aharonov, D.; Ta-Shma, A. Adiabatic Quantum State Generation and Statistical Zero
Knowledge. Proceedings of the Thirty-fifth Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of
Computing. New York, New York, 2003; pp 20–29.
(254) Toloui, B.; Love, P. J. Quantum Algorithms for Quantum Chemistry based on the
sparsity of the CI-matrix. 2013, arXiv:1312.2579 [quant-ph].
(255) Haah, J.; Hastings, M. B.; Kothari, R.; Low, G. H. Quantum algorithm for simulating
real time evolution of lattice Hamiltonians. 2018, arXiv:1801.03922 [quant-ph].
(256) Childs, A. M.; Wiebe, N. Hamiltonian Simulation Using Linear Combinations of Unitary Operations. Quantum Info. Comput. 2012, 12, 901–924.
(257) Childs, A. M.; Kothari, R. Simulating sparse Hamiltonians with star decompositions.
Conference on Quantum Computation, Communication, and Cryptography. 2010; pp
94–103.
(258) Chunhao, W.; Wossnig, L. A quantum algorithm for simulating non-sparse Hamiltonians. 2018, arXiv:1803.08273 [quant-ph].
(259) Kimmel, S.; Lin, C. Y.-Y.; Low, G. H.; Ozols, M.; Yoder, T. J. Hamiltonian simulation
with optimal sample complexity. npj Quantum Inf. 2017, 3, 13.
(260) Berry, D. W.; Ahokas, G.; Cleve, R.; Sanders, B. C. Efficient quantum algorithms
for simulating sparse Hamiltonians. Communications in Mathematical Physics 2007,
270, 359–371.
(261) Suzuki, M. Fractal decomposition of exponential operators with applications to manybody theories and Monte Carlo simulations. Phys. Lett. A 1990, 146, 319–323.
(262) Childs, A. M. On the relationship between continuous-and discrete-time quantum
walk. Commun. Math. Phys. 2010, 294, 581–603.

179

(263) Cleve, R.; Ekert, A.; Macchiavello, C.; Mosca, M. Quantum algorithms revisited. Proc.
Royal Soc. Lond. A. 1998; pp 339–354.
(264) Low, G. H.; Yoder, T. J.; Chuang, I. L. Methodology of resonant equiangular composite
quantum gates. Phys. Rev. X 2016, 6, 041067.
(265) Low, G. H. Hamiltonian simulation with nearly optimal dependence on spectral norm.
2018, arXiv:1807.03967 [quant-ph].
(266) Gilyén, A.; Su, Y.; Low, G. H.; Wiebe, N. Quantum singular value transformation and beyond: exponential improvements for quantum matrix arithmetics. 2018,
arXiv:1806.01838 [quant-ph].
(267) Low, G. H.; Chuang, I. L. Hamiltonian Simulation by Uniform Spectral Amplification.
2017, arXiv:1707.05391 [quant-ph].
(268) Wang, C.; Wossnig, L. A quantum algorithm for simulating non-sparse Hamiltonians.
2018, arXiv:1803.08273 [quant-ph].
(269) Poulin, D.; Qarry, A.; Somma, R.; Verstraete, F. Quantum simulation of timedependent Hamiltonians and the convenient illusion of Hilbert space. Phys. Rev. Lett.
2011, 106, 170501.
(270) Wiebe, N.; Berry, D. W.; Høyer, P.; Sanders, B. C. Simulating quantum dynamics on
a quantum computer. J. Phys. A 2011, 44, 445308.
(271) Kliesch, M.; Barthel, T.; Gogolin, C.; Kastoryano, M.; Eisert, J. Dissipative quantum
church-turing theorem. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2011, 107, 120501.
(272) Childs, A. M.; Maslov, D.; Nam, Y.; Ross, N. J.; Su, Y. Toward the first quantum
simulation with quantum speedup. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 2018, 115, 9456–
9461.

180

(273) Zalka, C. Simulating quantum systems on a quantum computer. Proc. Royal Soc.
Lond. A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences. 1998; pp 313–322.
(274) Giovannetti, V.; Lloyd, S.; Maccone, L. Architectures for a quantum random access
memory. Phys. Rev. A 2008, 78, 052310.
(275) Dobšı́ček, M.; Johansson, G.; Shumeiko, V.; Wendin, G. Arbitrary accuracy iterative quantum phase estimation algorithm using a single ancillary qubit: A two-qubit
benchmark. Phys. Rev. A 2007, 76 .
(276) Svore, K. M.; Hastings, M. B.; Freedman, M. Faster phase estimation. Quantum Inf.
Comput. 2014, 14, 306–328.
(277) Wiebe, N.; Granade, C. Efficient Bayesian phase estimation. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2016,
117, 010503.
(278) Paesani, S.; Gentile, A. A.; Santagati, R.; Wang, J.; Wiebe, N.; Tew, D. P.;
O’Brien, J. L.; Thompson, M. G. Experimental Bayesian quantum phase estimation
on a silicon photonic chip. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2017, 118, 100503.
(279) Berry, D. W.; Kieferová, M.; Scherer, A.; Sanders, Y. R.; Low, G. H.; Wiebe, N.;
Gidney, C.; Babbush, R. Improved techniques for preparing eigenstates of fermionic
Hamiltonians. npj Quantum Inf. 2018, 4, 22.
(280) Poulin, D.; Kitaev, A.; Steiger, D. S.; Hastings, M. B.; Troyer, M. Quantum Algorithm
for Spectral Measurement with a Lower Gate Count. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2018, 121,
010501.
(281) Babbush, R.; Gidney, C.; Berry, D. W.; Wiebe, N.; McClean, J.; Paler, A.; Fowler, A.;
Neven, H. Encoding Electronic Spectra in Quantum Circuits with Linear T Complexity. 2018, arXiv:1805.03662 [quant-ph].

181

(282) Bernstein, E.; Vazirani, U. Quantum Complexity Theory. SIAM J. Comput. 1997,
26, 1411–1473.
(283) Aaronson, S.; Ambainis, A. Forrelation: A problem that optimally separates quantum
from classical computing. SIAM J. Comput. 2018, 47, 982–1038.
(284) Whitfield, J. D. Unified views of quantum simulation algorithms for chemistry. 2015,
arXiv:1502.03771 [quant-ph].
(285) Grover, L.; Rudolph, T. Creating superpositions that correspond to efficiently integrable probability distributions. 2002, quant-ph/0208112.
(286) Abrams, D. S. Quantum algorithms. Ph.D. thesis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 1999.
(287) Tubman, N. M.; Mejuto-Zaera, C.; Epstein, J. M.; Hait, D.; Levine, D. S.; Huggins, W.; Jiang, Z.; McClean, J. R.; Babbush, R.; Head-Gordon, M.; Whaley, K. B.
Postponing the orthogonality catastrophe: efficient state preparation for electronic
structure simulations on quantum devices. 2018, arXiv:1809.05523 [quant-ph].
(288) Soklakov, A. N.; Schack, R. Efficient state preparation for a register of quantum bits.
Phys. Rev. A 2006, 73, 012307.
(289) Tubman, N. M.; Lee, J.; Takeshita, T. Y.; Head-Gordon, M.; Whaley, K. B. A deterministic alternative to the full configuration interaction quantum Monte Carlo method.
J. Phys. A 2016, 145, 044112.
(290) Farhi, E.; Goldstone, J.; Gutmann, S.; Lapan, J.; Lundgren, A.; Preda, D. A quantum
adiabatic evolution algorithm applied to random instances of an NP-complete problem.
Science 2001, 292, 472–475.
(291) Marzlin, K.-P.; Sanders, B. C. Inconsistency in the application of the adiabatic theorem. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2004, 93, 160408.
182

(292) Cheung, D.; Høyer, P.; Wiebe, N. Improved error bounds for the adiabatic approximation. J. Phys. A 2011, 44, 415302.
(293) Wiebe, N.; Babcock, N. S. Improved error-scaling for adiabatic quantum evolutions.
New J. Phys. 2012, 14, 013024.
(294) Lidar, D. A.; Rezakhani, A. T.; Hamma, A. Adiabatic approximation with exponential
accuracy for many-body systems and quantum computation. J. Math. Phys. 2009, 50,
102106.
(295) Kieferová, M.; Wiebe, N. On the power of coherently controlled quantum adiabatic
evolutions. New J. Phys. 2014, 16, 123034.
(296) Roland, J.; Cerf, N. J. Quantum search by local adiabatic evolution. Phy. Rev. A
2002, 65, 042308.
(297) Somma, R. D.; Nagaj, D.; Kieferová, M. Quantum speedup by quantum annealing.
Phys. Rev. Lett. 2012, 109, 050501.
(298) Crosson, E.; Farhi, E.; Yen-Yu Lin, C.; Lin, H.-H.; Shor, P. Different Strategies
for Optimization Using the Quantum Adiabatic Algorithm. 2014, arXiv:1401.7320
[quant-ph].
(299) Yung, M.-H.; Aspuru-Guzik, A. A quantum–quantum Metropolis algorithm. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 2012, 109, 754–759.
(300) Ditchfield, R.; Hehre, W. J.; Pople, J. A. Self-Consistent Molecular-Orbital Methods. IX. An Extended Gaussian-Type Basis for Molecular-Orbital Studies of Organic
Molecules. J. Chem. Phys. 1971, 54, 724–728.
(301) Babbush, R.; Wiebe, N.; McClean, J.; McClain, J.; Neven, H.; Chan, G. K.-L. Lowdepth quantum simulation of materials. Phys. Rev. X 2018, 8, 011044.

183

(302) Kivlichan, I. D.; McClean, J.; Wiebe, N.; Gidney, C.; Aspuru-Guzik, A.; Chan, G.
K.-L.; Babbush, R. Quantum Simulation of Electronic Structure with Linear Depth
and Connectivity. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2018, 120, 110501.
(303) White, S. R. Hybrid grid/basis set discretizations of the Schrödinger equation. J.
Chem. Phys. 2017, 147, 244102.
(304) Jones, N. C.; Whitfield, J. D.; McMahon, P. L.; Yung, M.-H.; Meter, R. V.; AspuruGuzik, A.; Yamamoto, Y. Faster quantum chemistry simulation on fault-tolerant quantum computers. New J. Phys. 2012, 14, 115023.
(305) Reiher, M.; Wiebe, N.; Svore, K. M.; Wecker, D.; Troyer, M. Elucidating reaction
mechanisms on quantum computers. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 2017, 114, 7555–
7560.
(306) McClean, J. R.; Babbush, R.; Love, P. J.; Aspuru-Guzik, A. Exploiting locality in
quantum computation for quantum chemistry. J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 2014, 5, 4368–
4380.
(307) Kliuchnikov, V.; Maslov, D.; Mosca, M. Fast and Efficient Exact Synthesis of Singlequbit Unitaries Generated by Clifford and T Gates. Quantum Info. Comput. 2013,
13, 607–630.
(308) Gidney, C. Halving the cost of quantum addition. Quantum 2018, 2, 74.
(309) Veis, L.; Višňák, J.; Fleig, T.; Knecht, S.; Saue, T.; Visscher, L.; Pittner, J. Relativistic
quantum chemistry on quantum computers. Phys. Rev. A 2012, 85 .
(310) Veis, L.; Pittner, J. Advances in Chemical Physics; John Wiley & Sons Inc., 2014; pp
107–136.
(311) Welch, J.; Greenbaum, D.; Mostame, S.; Aspuru-Guzik, A. Efficient quantum circuits
for diagonal unitaries without ancillas. New J. Phys. 2014, 16, 033040.
184

(312) Raeisi, S.; Wiebe, N.; Sanders, B. C. Quantum-circuit design for efficient simulations
of many-body quantum dynamics. New J. Phys. 2012, 14, 103017.
(313) Berry, D. W.; Childs, A. M. Black-box Hamiltonian Simulation and Unitary Implementation. Quantum Info. Comput. 2012, 12, 29–62.
(314) Berry, D. W.; Childs, A. M.; Kothari, R. Hamiltonian simulation with nearly optimal dependence on all parameters. IEEE 56th Annual Symposium on Foundations of
Computer Science (FOCS). 2015; pp 792–809.
(315) Novo, L.; Berry, D. W. Improved Hamiltonian simulation via a truncated Taylor series
and corrections. 2016, arXiv:1611.10033 [quant-ph].
(316) Santagati, R.; Wang, J.; Gentile, A. A.; Paesani, S.; Wiebe, N.; McClean, J. R.;
Morley-Short, S.; Shadbolt, P. J.; Bonneau, D.; Silverstone, J. W.; Tew, D. P.;
Zhou, X.; O’Brien, J. L.; Thompson, M. G. Witnessing eigenstates for quantum simulation of Hamiltonian spectra. Sci. Adv. 2018, 4, eaap9646.
(317) Temme, K.; Bravyi, S.; Gambetta, J. M. Error mitigation for short-depth quantum
circuits. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2017, 119, 180509.
(318) Endo, S.; Benjamin, S. C.; Li, Y. Practical Quantum Error Mitigation for Near-Future
Applications. Phys. Rev. X 2018, 8, 031027.
(319) Kandala, A.; Temme, K.; Corcoles, A. D.; Mezzacapo, A.; Chow, J. M.; Gambetta, J. M. Extending the computational reach of a noisy superconducting quantum
processor. 2018, arXiv:1805.04492 [quant-ph].
(320) McClean, J. R.; Kimchi-Schwartz, M. E.; Carter, J.; de Jong, W. A. Hybrid quantumclassical hierarchy for mitigation of decoherence and determination of excited states.
Phys. Rev. A 2017, 95 .

185

(321) McClean, J. R.; Boixo, S.; Smelyanskiy, V. N.; Babbush, R.; Neven, H. Barren
plateaus in quantum neural network training landscapes. 2018, arXiv:1803.11173
[quant-ph].
(322) Kutzelnigg, W. In Methods of Electronic Structure Theory; Schaefer, H. F., III, Ed ;
Plenum Press: New York, NY, USA, 1977; p 129.
(323) Hoffmann, M. R.; Simons, J. A unitary multiconfigurational coupled-cluster method:
Theory and applications. J. Chem. Phys. 1988, 88, 993–1002.
(324) Bartlett, R. J.; Kucharski, S. A.; Noga, J. Alternative coupled-cluster ansätze II. The
unitary coupled-cluster method. Chem. Phys. Lett. 1989, 155, 133–140.
(325) Wecker, D.; Hastings, M. B.; Troyer, M. Progress towards practical quantum variational algorithms. Phys. Rev. A 2015, 92 .
(326) Dallaire-Demers, P.-L.; Romero, J.; Veis, L.; Sim, S.; Aspuru-Guzik, A. Low-depth
circuit ansatz for preparing correlated fermionic states on a quantum computer. 2018,
arXiv:1801.01053 [quant-ph].
(327) Barkoutsos, P. K.; Gonthier, J. F.; Sokolov, I.; Moll, N.; Salis, G.; Fuhrer, A.;
Ganzhorn, M.; Egger, D. J.; Troyer, M.; Mezzacapo, A.; Filipp, S.; Tavernelli, I.
Quantum algorithms for electronic structure calculations: Particle-hole Hamiltonian
and optimized wave-function expansions. Phys. Rev. A 2018, 98, 022322.
(328) Yung, M.-H.; Casanova, J.; Mezzacapo, A.; McClean, J.; Lamata, L.; AspuruGuzik, A.; Solano, E. From transistor to trapped-ion computers for quantum chemistry. Sci. Rep. 2014, 4 .
(329) Romero, J.; Babbush, R.; McClean, J.; Hempel, C.; Love, P.; Aspuru-Guzik, A.
Strategies for quantum computing molecular energies using the unitary coupled cluster
ansatz. Quantum Sci. Technol. 2018,
186

(330) Dumitrescu, E. F.; McCaskey, A. J.; Hagen, G.; Jansen, G. R.; Morris, T. D.; Papenbrock, T.; Pooser, R. C.; Dean, D. J.; Lougovski, P. Cloud Quantum Computing of
an Atomic Nucleus. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2018,
(331) Farhi, E.; Goldstone, J.; Gutmann, S. A Quantum Approximate Optimization Algorithm. 2014, arXiv:1411.4028 [quant-ph].
(332) Farhi, E.; Harrow, A. W. Quantum Supremacy through the Quantum Approximate
Optimization Algorithm. 2016, arXiv:1602.07674 [quant-ph].
(333) Bengio, Y.; Lamblin, P.; Popovici, D.; Larochelle, H. Greedy layer-wise training of
deep networks. NIPS’06 Proceedings of the 19th International Conference on Neural
Information Processing Systems. 2006; pp 153–160.
(334) He, K.; Zhang, X.; Ren, S.; Sun, J. Deep residual learning for image recognition.
Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. 2016;
pp 770–778.
(335) Jiang, Z.; Sung, K. J.; Kechedzhi, K.; Smelyanskiy, V. N.; Boixo, S. Quantum algorithms to simulate many-body physics of correlated fermions. Phys. Rev. Appl. 2018,
9, 044036.
(336) Wecker, D.; Hastings, M. B.; Wiebe, N.; Clark, B. K.; Nayak, C.; Troyer, M. Solving
strongly correlated electron models on a quantum computer. Phys. Rev. A 2015, 92,
062318.
(337) Hoffman, D. K.; Raffenetti, R. C.; Ruedenberg, K. Generalization of Euler Angles to
N-Dimensional Orthogonal Matrices. J. Math. Phys. 1972, 13, 528–533.
(338) Shi, T.; Demler, E.; Cirac, J. I. Variational study of fermionic and bosonic systems
with non-Gaussian states: Theory and applications. Ann. Phys. 2018, 390, 245–302.

187

(339) Endo, S.; Jones, T.; McArdle, S.; Yuan, X.; Benjamin, S. Variational quantum algorithms for discovering Hamiltonian spectra. 2018, arXiv:1806.05707 [quant-ph].
(340) McKay, D. C.; Filipp, S.; Mezzacapo, A.; Magesan, E.; Chow, J. M.; Gambetta, J. M.
Universal gate for fixed-frequency qubits via a tunable bus. Phys. Rev. Appl. 2016, 6,
064007.
(341) Roth, M.; Ganzhorn, M.; Moll, N.; Filipp, S.; Salis, G.; Schmidt, S. Analysis of a
parametrically driven exchange-type gate and a two-photon excitation gate between
superconducting qubits. Phys. Rev. A 2017, 96, 062323.
(342) Egger, D. J.; Ganzhorn, M.; Salis, G.; Fuhrer, A.; Mueller, P.; Barkoutsos, P. K.;
Moll, N.; Tavernelli, I.; Filipp, S. Entanglement generation in superconducting qubits
using holonomic operations. 2018, arXiv:1804.04900 [quant-ph].
(343) Bravyi, S.; Gambetta, J. M.; Mezzacapo, A.; Temme, K. Tapering off qubits to simulate fermionic Hamiltonians. 2017, arXiv:1701.08213 [quant-ph].
(344) Romero, J.; Olson, J. P.; Aspuru-Guzik, A. Quantum autoencoders for efficient compression of quantum data. Quantum Sci. Technol. 2017, 2, 045001.
(345) Olson,

J.;

Sim,

S.;

Cao,

Y.

Implementation

of

CUSP

https://github.com/zapatacomputing/cusp cirq demo, 2018;

using

Cirq.

Accessed on Mon,

November 5, 2018.
(346) Rubin, N. C.; Babbush, R.; McClean, J. Application of fermionic marginal constraints
to hybrid quantum algorithms. New J. Phys. 2018, 20, 053020.
(347) Artacho, E.; Sánchez-Portal, D.; Ordejón, P.; Garcia, A.; Soler, J. M. Linear-scaling
ab-initio calculations for large and complex systems. Phys. Status Solidi B 1999, 215,
809–817.

188

(348) Filippi, C.; Umrigar, C. J. Correlated sampling in quantum Monte Carlo: A route to
forces. Phys. Rev. B 2000, 61, R16291–R16294.
(349) Cioslowski, J. Many-electron densities and reduced density matrices; Springer Science
& Business Media, 2000.
(350) Alcoba, D.; Valdemoro, C. Spin structure and properties of the correlation matrices
corresponding to pure spin states: Controlling the S-representability of these matrices.
Int. J. Quantum Chem. 2005, 102, 629–644.
(351) Rios, L. M.; Sahinidis, N. V. Derivative-free optimization: a review of algorithms and
comparison of software implementations. J. Global Optim. 2012, 56, 1247–1293.
(352) Guerreschi, G. G.; Smelyanskiy, M. Practical optimization for hybrid quantumclassical algorithms. 2017, arXiv:1701.01450 [quant-ph].
(353) Kennedy, J. Encyclopedia of machine learning; Springer, 2011; pp 760–766.
(354) Spall, J. C. A one-measurement form of simultaneous perturbation stochastic approximation. Automatica 1997, 33, 109–112.
(355) Spall, J. C. Adaptive stochastic approximation by the simultaneous perturbation
method. IEEE Trans. Autom. Control 2000, 45, 1839–1853.
(356) Han, L.; Neumann, M. Effect of dimensionality on the Nelder–Mead simplex method.
Optim. Methods Softw. 2006, 21, 1–16.
(357) McArdle, S.; Yuan, X.; Benjamin, S. Error mitigated digital quantum simulation.
2018, arXiv:1807.02467 [quant-ph].
(358) McArdle, S.; Endo, S.; Aspuru-Guzik, A.; Benjamin, S.; Yuan, X. Quantum computational chemistry. 2018, arXiv:1808.10402 [quant-ph].

189

(359) Garcia-Saez, A.; Latorre, J. I. Addressing hard classical problems with Adiabatically
Assisted Variational Quantum Eigensolvers. 2018, arXiv:1806.02287 [quant-ph].
(360) Higgott, O.; Wang, D.; Brierley, S. Variational Quantum Computation of Excited
States. 2018, arXiv:1805.08138 [quant-ph].
(361) Angeli, C.; Pastore, M.; Cimiraglia, R. New perspectives in multireference perturbation theory: the n-electron valence state approach. Theor. Chem. Acc. 2007, 117,
743–754.
(362) Zgid, D.; Ghosh, D.; Neuscamman, E.; Chan, G. K.-L. A study of cumulant approximations to n-electron valence multireference perturbation theory. J. Chem. Phys.
2009, 130, 194107.
(363) Kong, L.; Valeev, E. F. Perturbative correction for the basis set incompleteness error
of complete-active-space self-consistent field. J. Chem. Phys. 2010, 133, 174126.
(364) Torheyden, M.; Valeev, E. F. Universal perturbative explicitly correlated basis set
incompleteness correction. J. Chem. Phys. 2009, 131, 171103.
(365) McArdle, S.; Jones, T.; Endo, S.; Li, Y.; Benjamin, S.; Yuan, X. Variational quantum
simulation of imaginary time evolution. 2018, arXiv:1804.03023 [quant-ph].
(366) Babbush, R.; Love, P. J.; Aspuru-Guzik, A. Adiabatic Quantum Simulation of Quantum Chemistry. Sci. Rep. 2014, 4 .
(367) Smirnov, A. Y.; Savel'ev, S.; Mourokh, L. G.; Nori, F. Modelling chemical reactions
using semiconductor quantum dots. Europhys. Lett. 2007, 80, 67008.
(368) Torrontegui, E.; Ruschhaupt, A.; Guéry-Odelin, D.; Muga, J. G. Simulation of quantum collinear chemical reactions with ultracold atoms. J. Phys. B: At., Mol. Opt.
Phys. 2011, 44, 195302.

190

(369) Georgescu, I. M.; Ashhab, S.; Nori, F. Quantum simulation. Rev. Mod. Phys. 2014,
86, 153–185.
(370) Perdomo-Ortiz, A.; Dickson, N.; Drew-Brook, M.; Rose, G.; Aspuru-Guzik, A. Finding
low-energy conformations of lattice protein models by quantum annealing. Sci. Rep.
2012, 2 .
(371) Babbush, R.; Perdomo-Ortiz, A.; O’Gorman, B.; Macready, W.; Aspuru-Guzik, A.
Advances in Chemical Physics; Wiley-Blackwell, 2014; Vol. 155; Chapter 5, pp 201–
244.
(372) Kempe, J.; Kitaev, A.; Regev, O. The complexity of the local Hamiltonian problem.
SIAM J. Comput. 2006, 35, 1070–1097.
(373) Cao, Y.; Babbush, R.; Biamonte, J.; Kais, S. Hamiltonian gadgets with reduced resource requirements. Phys. Rev. A 2015, 91 .
(374) Barkoutsos, P. K.; Moll, N.; Staar, P. W. J.; Mueller, P.; Fuhrer, A.; Filipp, S.;
Troyer, M.; Tavernelli, I. Fermionic Hamiltonians for quantum simulations: a general
reduction scheme. 2017, arXiv:1706.03637 [quant-ph].
(375) Clements, W. R.; Renema, J. J.; Eckstein, A.; Valido, A. A.; Lita, A.; Gerrits, T.; Nam, S. W.; Kolthammer, W. S.; Huh, J.; Walmsley, I. A. Approximating
Vibronic Spectroscopy with Imperfect Quantum Optics. 2017, arXiv:1710.08655
[quant-ph].
(376) Sparrow, C.; Martı́n-López, E.; Maraviglia, N.; Neville, A.; Harrold, C.; Carolan, J.;
Joglekar, Y. N.; Hashimoto, T.; Matsuda, N.; O’Brien, J. L.; Tew, D. P.; Laing, A.
Simulating the vibrational quantum dynamics of molecules using photonics. Nature
2018, 557, 660–667.

191

(377) Hamilton, C.; Kruse, R.; Sansoni, L.; Barkhofen, S.; Silberhorn, C.; Jex, I. Gaussian
Boson Sampling. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2017, 119, 170501.
(378) Shen, Y.; Lu, Y.; Zhang, K.; Zhang, J.; Zhang, S.; Huh, J.; Kim, K. Quantum optical
emulation of molecular vibronic spectroscopy using a trapped-ion device. Chem. Sci.
2018, 9, 836–840.
(379) Olivares, D. G.; Peropadre, B.; Huh, J.; Garcı́a-Ripoll, J. J. Quantum emulation of
molecular force fields: A blueprint for a superconducting architecture. Phys. Rev.
Appl. 2017, 8, 064008.
(380) Eckhardt, R. Stan ulam, john von neumann, and the monte carlo method. Los Alamos
Sci. 1987, 15, 30.
(381) Motta, M.; Ye, E.; McClean, J. R.; Li, Z.; Minnich, A. J.; Babbush, R.; Kin-Lic
Chan, G. Low rank representations for quantum simulation of electronic structure.
2018, arXiv:1808.02625 [physics.comp-ph].
(382) Johnson, P. D.; Romero, J.; Olson, J.; Cao, Y.; Aspuru-Guzik, A. QVECTOR: an
algorithm for device-tailored quantum error correction. 2017, arXiv:1711.02249
[quant-ph].
(383) Wang, D.; Higgott, O.; Brierley, S. A Generalised Variational Quantum Eigensolver.
2018, arXiv:1802.00171 [quant-ph].
(384) O’Brien, T. E.; Tarasinski, B.; Terhal, B. M. Quantum phase estimation for noisy,
small-scale experiments. 2018, arXiv:1809.09697 [quant-ph].
(385) Rigetti 8Q-Agave specification v.2.0.0.dev0. https:www.rigetti.com/qpu, 2018; Accessed on Mon, November 5, 2018.

192

(386) IBM Q 5 Tenerife backend specification v1.1.0. https://github.com/QISKit/qiskitbackend-information/tree/master/backends/tenerife/V1, 2018; Accessed on Mon,
November 5, 2018.
(387) Havlicek, V.; Córcoles, A. D.; Temme, K.; Harrow, A. W.; Kandala, A.; Chow, J. M.;
Gambetta, J. M. Supervised learning with quantum enhanced feature spaces. 2018,
arXiv:1804.11326 [quant-ph].
(388) Khatri, S.; LaRose, R.; Poremba, A.; Cincio, L.; Sornborger, A. T.; Coles, P. J.
Quantum-assisted quantum compiling. 2018, arXiv:1807.00800 [quant-ph].
(389) Smith, R. S.; Curtis, M. J.; Zeng, W. J. A Practical Quantum Instruction Set Architecture. 2016, arXiv:1608.03355 [quant-ph].
(390) QISKit. https://github.com/QISKit/qiskit-sdk-py, 2018; Accessed on Mon, November
5, 2018.
(391) Steiger, D. S.; Häner, T.; Troyer, M. ProjectQ: an open source software framework for
quantum computing. Quantum 2018, 2, 49.
(392) Cirq: a Python framework for creating, editing, and invoking Noisy Intermediate Scale
Quantum (NISQ) circuits. https://github.com/quantumlib/Cirq, 2018; Accessed on
Mon, November 5, 2018.
(393) Killoran, N.;
brook,

C.

simulating,

Izaac, J.;

Strawberry
and

Quesada, N.;
Fields:

optimizing

Bergholm, V.;

full-stack

continuous

Python

variable

Amy, M.;

library

quantum

Weed-

for

designing,

optical

circuits.

https://github.com/XanaduAI/strawberryfields, 2018; Accessed on Mon, November
5, 2018.
(394) Mueck, L. Quantum reform. Nat. Chem. 2015, 7, 361–363.

193

(395) Rigetti,

C.;

Alidoust,

N.

The

Rigetti

Quantum

Advantage

Prize.

https://medium.com/rigetti/the-rigetti-quantum-advantage-prize-8976492c5c64,
2018; Accessed on Mon, November 5, 2018.
(396) Barends, R. et al. Superconducting quantum circuits at the surface code threshold for
fault tolerance. Nature 2014, 508, 500–503.
(397) Linke, N. M.; Maslov, D.; Roetteler, M.; Debnath, S.; Figgatt, C.; Landsman, K. A.;
Wright, K.; Monroe, C. Experimental comparison of two quantum computing architectures. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 2017, 114, 3305–3310.
(398) Yoder, T. J.; Kim, I. H. The surface code with a twist. Quantum 2017, 1, 2.
(399) Davidson, E. R.; Feller, D. Basis set selection for molecular calculations. Chem. Rev.
1986, 86, 681–696.
(400) Jensen, F. Atomic orbital basis sets. Wiley Interdiscip. Rev.: Comput. Mol. Sci. 2013,
3, 273–295.
(401) Nagy, B.; Jensen, F. Reviews in Computational Chemistry; Wiley Online Library,
2017; Chapter 3.
(402) Havlı́ček, V.; Troyer, M.; Whitfield, J. D. Operator locality in the quantum simulation
of fermionic models. Phys. Rev. A 2017, 95 .
(403) Fenwick, P. M. A new data structure for cumulative frequency tables. Softw. Pract.
Exp. 1994, 24, 327–336.
(404) McClean, J. R. et al. OpenFermion: The Electronic Structure Package for Quantum
Computers. 2017, arXiv:1710.07629 [quant-ph].

194

