Numerical simulation of flow over buildings
using OpenFOAM®
Cite as: AIP Conference Proceedings 2112, 020149 (2019); https://doi.org/10.1063/1.5112334
Published Online: 24 June 2019
Rakshantha Mohan, Senthilkumar Sundararaj and Kannan Budda Thiagarajan

ARTICLES YOU MAY BE INTERESTED IN
An OpenFOAM solver for multiphase and turbulent flow
Physics of Fluids 32, 043303 (2020); https://doi.org/10.1063/1.5145051
Numerical simulation of flat plate boundary layer transition using OpenFOAM®
AIP Conference Proceedings 2112, 020134 (2019); https://doi.org/10.1063/1.5112319
A tensorial approach to computational continuum mechanics using object-oriented
techniques
Computers in Physics 12, 620 (1998); https://doi.org/10.1063/1.168744

AIP Conference Proceedings 2112, 020149 (2019); https://doi.org/10.1063/1.5112334
© 2019 Author(s).

2112, 020149

Numerical Simulation of Flow Over Buildings using
OpenFOAM®.
Rakshantha Mohan a), Senthilkumar Sundararaj b)and Kannan Budda Thiagarajan c)
Department of Aerospace Engineering, SRM Institute of Science and Technology, Kattankulathur, Kancheepuram
District, Tamil Nadu, 603203, India.
a)

rakshanthamohan97@gmail.com b)senthilkumar.sun@ktr.srmuniv.ac.in
Corresponding author: skyinventorbt@gmail.com ; kannan.th@ktr.srmuniv.ac.in

c)

Abstract. The present work is a numerical simulation of flow over buildings. The numerical
simulation was carried out using an open source Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) tool
called OpenFOAM®. The Reynolds Averaged Navier Stokes Equations (RANS) was solved
along with a two-equation turbulent closure. The solutions from the numerical simulations are
post-processed with open source software namely Paraview which is based on Visualisation Tool
Kit (VTK). Effect of flow over buildings is described in terms of contours of velocity. Further,
the same data is processed with Line Integral Convolution (LIC) to reveal three-dimensional
flow properties on a plane parallel to the inlet flow. The streamlines are visualised in addition to
the LIC and velocity contours. The post processed results reveal the real flow physics with just
LIC alone or with the help of streamlines and contours.
INTRODUCTION
Wind pattern around the tall buildings or tall structures may generate contrary and sometimes
risky residential, industrial and environmental problem at an unimaginative level. This problem
was observed and is in existence for nearly 2 to 3 centuries around the globe. This became the
reason for the initial investigations using wind tunnel. Now a days Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) is being a very useful tool to simulate flow over an object, building and even a topo graphy. Researches are being carried out using this tool.
Veena et al [1] determined the best possible location for installing wind turbines based on
computational analysis. They used OpenFOAM® which uses pressure-implicit splitting operator
(PISO) algorithm to solve the governing Navier Stokes equations by iterations. They were able
to conclude that for a unit tall building, a significant component of winds is available to be used
for generating wind power. For twin buildings, the placement of wind turbines can not only be at
the roof top but also in between the buildings for using the tunnelling effect.
M. Ricci et al [2] studied the capabilities of Large Eddy Simulation (LES) which is a fluid flow
analysis tool. As flow over a bluff body is difficult to analyse LES was used. Turbulent flow was
simulated around the isolated buildings. Pressure field was determined and was compared with
experimental results. Computational solution using domain with dimensions L x H x W and
experimental results were obtained by conducting experiments in ABL wind tunnel. The

The 11th National Conference on Mathematical Techniques and Applications
AIP Conf. Proc. 2112, 020149-1–020149-7; https://doi.org/10.1063/1.5112334
Published by AIP Publishing. 978-0-7354-1844-8/$30.00

020149-1

convergence of simulation was checked for every angle of attack by analysing the pressure
values. Vortical structures for 0,45,90 degrees were visualized qualitatively.
Pressure distribution and overall pressure distribution were also obtained. Z. Harun et al [3]
studied the LES for the flow over the Petronas Twin Towers, the highest skyscraper in Kuala
Lumpur, Malaysia. The simulation revealed the structure of the flow over the building. They
used OpenFOAM® to simulate the results. The pressure-velocity coup-ling was maintained by
the PISO algorithm. It was found that two large couples of vortices were generated in the flow;
the first in-between the two towers and the second, in the downstream. The results show that the
internal couple of vortices are much stronger but of little turbulence intensities. The flow
generates two regions with high vorticity activities; the first is in-between the two towers and the
second at the downstream. The flow is slightly affected by the PTT above height 2H. The couple
of vortices in-between the two towers is much stronger than the one in the wake region.
However, its turbulence level is lower. Both couple of vortices becomes weaker at heights above
H due to the diameter reduction of the two towers. Turbulence is transported vertically upwards
in between the two towers and downwards in their wake.
Tsubasa Okaze and Akashi Mochida [4] generated a time series of wind velocity and fluctuations
of air temperature which was based on the Cholesky decomposition of the Reynolds stress tensor
and turbulent heat flux. An orthogonal grid system was applied. The mean wind velocity and the
temperature of air predicted by LES using the generated inflow turbulence were generally in
good agreement with the experimental results.
MarcoFelipe King et al [5] made a computational analysis using Ansys Fluent and also with
OpenFOAM® software. They compared it with original experimental measurements of airflow
in and around a full-scale cubical structure both in isolation and within an irregular asymmetrical
array. They investigated simple full-scale urban-like geometries, where they isolated the effects
on ventilation to understand it better. This study was an idealised study which considers only
wind-driven effects, the irregular asymmetrical arrays and its coupling, with openable façade
components at full-scale providing a better opportunity to investigate ventilation under real wind
conditions.
Federico Flores et al studied about the development of a numerical fluid dynamics solver in
OpenFOAM® [6] framework to simulate the internal ventilation consisting of an open pit that
includes the effects of induced turbulence, stratification and buoyancy. Simulations using open
foam and experiments by generating LES and DES was carried out. URANS and the Detached
Eddy Simulation techniques revealed similar results for simple non-buoyant flow cases. In
strongly buoyant flow cases, the capability of DES to solve induced turbulence was not
reproduced by URANS techniques.
Rallaon Dadioti and Simon J. Rees [7] examined the performance of conventional RANS
turbulence models and detached eddy simulation (DES) techniques implemented in the open
source code OpenFOAM®. Simulations were made for the flow over a unit tall building and was
compared with the experimental estimations from wind tunnel. Results obtained concludes that,
DES is significantly more demanding than RANS calculations but offers improves robustness
and accuracy for a variety of wind conditions.

020149-2

Francisco TojaSilva et al [8] simulated the flow of wind around a building kept in isolation using
various turbulence models under RANS using OpenFOAM®. The behaviour of the various
RANS models was studied at various regions of the building roof like upstream side,
downstream side and the mid region of the roof. The most appropriate turbulence models under
RANS were identified for all the situations both qualitatively and quantitatively.
COMPUTATIONAL METHODOLOGY
To simulate the flow over buildings, an open source CFD software namely OpenFOAM® has
been used. The present case is an example case available in OpenFOAM. The set of buildings
over which the flow pattern is to be simulated is placed at the middle of a rectangular domain
with z axis denoting the height of the buildings (refer to Figure 1). The streamline pattern around
this model would be applicable to most of the cities as the model contains buildings with varying
height and width. Short buildings are placed in front of tall buildings and vice versa which is a
typical example for most of the urban area.

FIGURE 1. Building domain used for analysis in OpenFOAM®.

The computational domain is divided in to smaller cells to form a mesh where the governing
equations are solved. The figure 2 shows plane passing from the inlet to the outlet along with the
mesh. It is clear from the figure that the mesh is fine at the surface of the buildings and becomes
coarse as we move away from the buildings. Meshing in such a way would result in better
accuracy near the surface of the building.

FIGURE 2. Quad type mesh showing grids coarser away from the building surface.

020149-3

The governing equations consisting of Reynolds Averaged Navier Stokes equations along with
the two-equation turbulence closure model namely standard k-epsilon model was used to solve
via SIMPLE algorithm as implemented in OpenFOAM as simpleFoam. The inlet velocity is
fixed at 10m/s with turbulent intensity of 0.1 based on which the k and epsilon was calculated.
The kinematic viscosity was fixed at 1.5E- 05 m2/s. The results are post processed using
Paraview and the same is discussed in the following section.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
The post processed results are presented in this section as contours, streamlines and LIC
visualizations. The figure 3 shows the streamline pattern around the buildings subjected to the
flow. The streamlines are injected form the line source place in between the buildings oriented
along the Y-axis. The streamlines are integrated on both the directions using Runge-Kutta 4-5
order method. This is to ensure there is no missing of flow path or streamline pattern at some
places. The resulting streamline is coloured by velocity magnitude to reveal the re-circulation
zones and the normal flow zones.
The initial upstream flow is quite undisturbed and as the flow passes over the buildings, there is a
production of three-dimensional wake which includes some stagnant flow and complex flow
patterns. The streamlines show spiral behaviour near the downstream buildings and it also
reveals the flow in lateral directions in comparison to the major flow being in the longitudinal
direction.

FIGURE 3. Streamline pattern around the building model.

The figure 4 shows the velocity contour in a vertical plane that extends from the inlet to the
outlet. The contours reveal the acceleration of flow over the buildings especially the curved ones.
The top of few buildings acts like a convergent section and it accelerates the flow to show higher
values of velocity magnitudes. The lower values of velocity magnitude indicate stagnant zone or
a re-circulation zone and it is see usually behind the buildings. The wake zone is also seen
clearly by the contours of velocity magnitude.

020149-4

Figure 4. Velocity contours on a vertical plane passing through building

The figure 5 shows the velocity contour with Line Integral Convolution (LIC) visualization. The
LIC contours are multiplied with the velocity magnitude and the contours are enhanced along
with proper selection of parameters to create better results. The contours show the traces of
velocity magnitude in terms of colour and also looks like streamlines drawn on the plane. The
contours show flow structures both in plane and out of plane.

Figure 5. Velocity contour plot showing LIC visualisation

020149-5

The figure 6 shows LIC visualization on a plane passing through buildings at the farthest end of
y-axis in the positive direction. The flow features revealed by the LIC contours include rotational
parts, in plane and out of plane motions. This visualization also reveals some physics like nodal
points, sources, sinks, lines of merger, injections and ejections and the same shall be explored
both experimentally and mathematically to get deeper insights. LIC is found to be a better way of
post processing visualization in complex flow fields like flow between buildings.
.

Figure 6. LIC visualization in positive end of y-axis

CONCLUSIONS
The present work deals with the numerical simulation of flow over buildings using an open
source OpenFOAM®. A rectangular computational domain was used to study the effect of flow
over the buildings. The contours of velocity only revealed the magnitude and streamlines
provided the three-dimensional data. Further, the same data is processed with Line Integral Convolution (LIC) to reveal three- dimensional flow physics on a plane parallel to the inlet flow. The
streamlines are visualised and the same is found difficult to analyse the flow physics. For complex flows such as flow over buildings, LIC was found advantageous over the conventional post
processing methods.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors acknowledge the usage of Advanced Computing Laboratory (ACL), Department of Aerospace
Engineering at SRMIST for the simulations performed towards the present research work.

020149-6

REFERENCES
1.
2.

3.
4.
5.

6.
7.
8.
9.

Veena et al 2017 J. Phys.: Conf. Ser. 822 012013.
Ricci, M., Patruno, L., Kalkman, I., de Miranda, S., & Blocken, B. (2018). Towards LES as a design tool:
Wind loads assessment on a high-rise building. Journal of Wind Engineering and Industrial Aerodynamics,
180, 1-18.
Z. Harun, E. Reda, S. Abdullah. Large Eddy Simulation of the Wind Flow Over Skyscrapers. Recent
Advances in Mechanics and Mechanical Engineering.
Tsubasa OKAZE, Akashi MOCHIDA. Large eddy simulation of non-isothermal flow around building
Using Artificially Generated Inflow Turbulent Fluctuations of Wind Velocity and Air Temperature. Journal
of Heat Is-land Institute International Vol. 12-2 (2017).
Marco-FelipeKing, Hannah L.Gough, ChristosHalios, Janet F.Barlow, AdamRobertson, RogerHoxey and
Catherine J.Noakes. Investigating the influence of neighbouring structures on natural ventilation potential
of a full-scale cubical building using time-dependent CFD. Journal of Wind Engineering and Industrial
Aerodynamics, 169, 265-279 (2017).
Federico Flores, Rene Garreaud, Ricardo C. Munoz. CFD simulations of turbulent buoyant atmospheric
flows over complex geometry: Solver development in OpenFOAM®.
Rallaon Dadioti, Simon J. Rees. Validation of Open Source Cfd Applied To Building External Flows.
Proceed-ings of BS2015:14th Conference of International Building Performance Simulation Association,
Hyderabad, India, Dec. 7-9, 2015.
Francisco Toja-Silva, CarlosPeralta, OscarLopez-Garcia, JorgeNavarro, Ignacio Cruz. Roof region
dependent
wind
potential
assessment
with
different
RANS
turbulence
models.
J.
WindEng.Ind.Aerodyn.142(2015)258– 271
Marco-FelipeKing, Hannah L.Gough, ChristosHalios, Janet F.Barlow, AdamRobertson, RogerHoxey,
Catherine J.Noakes.

020149-7

