The surface code with a twist
Theodore J. Yoder1 and Isaac H. Kim2
1 Department of Physics, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
2 IBM, Thomas J. Watson Research Center

arXiv:1612.04795v2 [quant-ph] 20 Mar 2017

March 22, 2017

work on the surface code inspires optimism – perhaps
we have found the “best” topological code [10].

The surface code is one of the most successful approaches to topological quantum errorcorrection. It boasts the smallest known syndrome extraction circuits and correspondingly
largest thresholds. Defect-based logical encodings of a new variety called twists have made
it possible to implement the full Clifford group
without state distillation. Here we investigate a
patch-based encoding involving a modified twist.
In our modified formulation, the resulting codes,
called triangle codes for the shape of their planar layout, have only weight-four checks and relatively simple syndrome extraction circuits that
maintain a high, near surface-code-level threshold. They also use 25% fewer physical qubits
per logical qubit than the surface code. Moreover, benefiting from the twist, we can implement all Clifford gates by lattice surgery without the need for state distillation. By a surgical
transformation to the surface code, we also develop a scheme of doing all Clifford gates on surface code patches in an atypical planar layout,
though with lower qubit efficiency than the triangle code. Finally, we remark that logical qubits
encoded in triangle codes are naturally amenable
to logical tomography, and the smallest triangle code can demonstrate high-pseudothreshold
fault-tolerance to depolarizing noise using just 13
physical qubits.

Of course, this is a difficult claim to justify completely
in any rigorous sense. There are a plethora of other topological coding strategies offering advantages and disadvantages. As one example, subsystem topological codes
can perform syndrome measurement by measuring only
operators that are less than weight four [11, 12]. As another example, color codes [13] can implement Clifford
gates transversally [14, 15] and thus more efficiently than
the surface code, even if they fail to achieve as large a
threshold [16]. Strictly speaking there is not even just
one best strategy for computing with the surface code.
One option is to encode multiple qubits into one large
region of surface code by using defects called holes [17].
Braiding the holes results in logical operations on the encoded qubits [3, 18], and, using the technique of magicstate distillation [19, 20], can achieve universality [21]
limited only by T -depth of the circuit [22]. Alternatively,
computing with surface code “patches”, where each logical qubit is localized to a square grid of physical qubits,
can be done with lattice surgery [16, 23] and comparatively few qubits. Still, both these strategies use state
distillation for the Clifford phase gate, S = diag(1, i).
Surface code computation has more recently undergone another reformulation with the introduction of
a different type of defect, called a twist [24, 25]. A
twist defect is a weight-five check embedded in the surface code lattice. Unlike a hole, a twist destroys the
Calderbank-Shor-Steane (CSS) [26, 27] nature of the surface code, as the weight five check contains Pauli Y .
Four (or three) twists in a surface code lattice with uniform boundary can encode one qubit [25]. Interestingly,
this twist encoding appears to have advantages over the
hole encoding, as the full Clifford group can be faulttolerantly implemented by local operations and without
state distillation for the phase gate S [25]. Using both
the hole and twist encodings together is also possible
[28] and implements the same gate set similarly. So far,
however, while the advantages of twist defects have been
explored for multiple defects within the same large lattice, there has been little said about possible advantages
for patch-based schemes of computation, which, due to
lower qubit overhead, are more friendly to current experiments.

1 Introduction
The surface code [1–3] is a dominating proposal for
nearest-neighbor quantum error-correction in a plane.
But there are some good reasons for its ubiquity. For
instance, asymptotically in the code distance and up to
a constant factor, the surface code uses the fewest number of qubits per logical qubit. Also, the surface code
has optimally sized checks (weight-four) for a topological stabilizer code [4] and a simple scheme for syndrome
extraction using only one ancilla qubit per check [5].
Moreover, the syndrome information can be processed
efficiently [2, 6–8], resulting in the highest known topological fault-tolerance threshold [9]. The huge body of
Theodore J. Yoder: tjyoder@mit.edu

This is our focus in this work, the development of a
1

planar patch layout that uses twist defects to achieve full
Clifford group computation with local operations. Universality can then be achieved
by injecting and distilling
√
magic states for T = S gates. We find that a single
twist defect placed in the middle of a patch of surface
code suffices for this task. Moreover, the typical formulation of a twist as a weight-five check can be simplified
in our case to weight-four. The family of non-CSS codes
corresponding to these twist-containing patches we call
triangle codes, because the physical qubits making up a
single patch can be arranged to fit within a triangle in
the plane. We also show how triangle codes are related
by lattice surgery to the traditional surface code, and
use this to deduce a surgical method for implementing
S on patches of surface code in a nonstandard planar
layout.
In addition to providing a full, distillation-free implementation of the Clifford group, triangle codes have
further advantages over patches of surface code. First,
triangle codes of (odd) distance d use 3d2 /4 + 1/4 data
qubits per logical qubit, beating the (rotated [5, 29]) surface code’s d2 . While this does not asymptotically beat
some color codes [16], which are yet another constant
factor better, triangle codes also benefit from near surface code thresholds. Indeed, depolarizing-noise faulttolerant circuits for syndrome extraction on triangle
codes can be made nearly as simple as that on surface codes, using the minimal number of timesteps when
amortized over many rounds of extraction and nearly the
minimal number of ancillas (i.e. one per stabilizer generator).
A second advantage of triangle codes is their symmetry – logical Pauli operators X̄, Ȳ , and Z̄ can be taken to
each lie along a different side of the triangular layout of
qubits. This means that fault-tolerant measurement and
initialization in any Pauli basis is possible, albeit not as
straightforwardly as on CCS codes like the surface code.
Additionally, triangle codes possess transversal order3 single-qubit Clifford gates, which cyclically permute
the Paulis, up to a permutation. For a single patch of
triangle code, the fact that a permutation is required
can be ignored, and a logical order-3 gate, plus logical
initialization and measurement of the patch, suffice for
tomography (or randomized benchmarking) of the logical qubit. Noting that for d = 3 this can be done with
just 13 physical qubits including ancillas makes this a
promising scheme for early implementations of complete
quantum fault-tolerance to depolarizing noise.
In Sec. 2 we define the triangle codes, calculate their
threshold for topological memory, and present circuits
for syndrome extraction. In Sec. 3, we discuss initialization and measurement of triangle code patches. The
strategies we put forward there translate into schemes
for computation with tesselating triangle patches in the
plane, Sec. 4. In Sec. 5 we discuss circuits specifically
for the smallest distance-3 triangle code, and calculate
pseudothresholds. Sec. 6 concludes.

Figure 1: Converting a dislocation code [24, 25] into an asymmetric triangle code. In (a) a dislocation code with two twists
encodes one logical qubit (physical qubits are on the vertices
of the lattice pictured). Stabilizers, both plaquettes and loops,
are colored dark gray if they are X-type and white if they are
Z-type. Stabilizers graded white to gray are mixed-type, and
consist of Xs where they are gray, Zs where they are white,
and a Y on the blue, dotted qubits. Overlaid is a local Clifford
circuit of CNOTs that takes the code to (b) when the inner
CNOTs are applied, followed by the outer. Note that many
qubits are unentangled from the bulk of the code during this
process. From (b) to (c), a single-qubit Clifford is applied to
remove a Pauli Y from one stabilizer, and the code is reoriented
to get an asymmetric triangle code.

2 Constructing and error-correcting triangle codes
Our first task is to construct the family of triangle codes.
The signature element of a triangle code is a central
twist defect, and so to begin, we show in Fig. 1 how the
triangle codes arise from the dislocation codes [24, 25]
by lattice surgery. Notice that this surgery simplifies the
code — all stabilizer generators are now at most weight4 and fewer physical qubits are required. Further lattice
surgery can symmetrize or extend the triangle code into
the more general family that we describe now.
A general r × s × t triangle code is described by three
positive integer parameters r, s, t. We find the codes
are most easily described by placing qubits at points
in three dimensions, (x, y, z) ∈ Zr × Zs × Zt for Zn =
{0, 1, . . . , n − 1}, subject to the constraint that at least
one of x, y, z is zero. In other words, this places qubits on
integer lattices in the xy-, yz-, and xz-planes as seen in
Fig. 2(a). Note that placing qubits in three dimensions
is entirely for conceptual simplicity, and a projection
into two dimensions is readily obtained, Fig. 2(b). The
2

Figure 2: (a) The distance-5 triangle code viewed as three
conjoined surface codes in 3D. Black dots are data qubits, and
stabilizers are colored as in Fig. 1 except for the Pauli Y on the
origin that is part of the central mixed-type stabilizer, which is
now left implicit. Along the sides, a string of Zs (blue) is Z̄, a
string of Xs (red) X̄, and a mixed-type string (green) Ȳ . (b)
Shows the same, but in a plane.

projection fits within the eponymous triangle.
Stabilizers of a triangle code are local Pauli operators
of either weight-4 (plaquettes) or weight-2 (loops). Plaquettes are associated with half-integer lattice points in
the xy-, yz-, and xz-planes. They may be X-type (consisting of only Pauli X and I operators), Z-type (only
Pauli Z and I), or mixed-type (any other combination
of Paulis). By convention, we will choose the plaquette
at (1/2, 0, 1/2) to be X-type. Plaquettes, in order to
commute, must alternate X-type and Z-type whenever
possible (e.g. implying the plaquette at (0, 1/2, 1/2) is Ztype), but geometry demands that mixed-type plaquettes are placed starting from the origin and extending in
some direction to the outer edge. We conventionally take
the plaquettes associated to the points (1/2, m + 1/2, 0),
for m ∈ Zs−1 to be mixed type. The central mixed-type
plaquette at (1/2, 1/2, 0) is special in that it contains
Pauli Y on the qubit (0, 0, 0), while all other mixed-type
plaquettes are half X and half Z.
Loops are placed with support on every other pair of
qubits along the boundary. They can also be X-type, Ztype, or mixed-type. By convention, we choose Z-type
loops to be associated with qubits for which x = r − 1.
This fixes the position and type of all other loops.
By counting qubits and stabilizer generators it can be
checked that triangle codes for any r, s, t, encode one
logical qubit. Logical operators X̄, Ȳ , and Z̄ may be
taken to lie on the boundary, crossing the x-, y-, and
z-axes, respectively, as shown in Fig. 2(a). If P(x,y,z)
denotes a Pauli acting on the qubit at (x, y, z),
Y
Y
X̄ =
X(r−1,j,0)
X(r−1,0,k) ,
(1)
Ȳ =
Z̄ =

j∈Zs \0

k∈Zt

Y

Y

Z(i,s−1,0)

X(0,s−1,k) ,

(2)

Z(0,j,t−1) .

(3)

i∈Zr \0

k∈Zt

Y

Y

Z(i,0,t−1)

i∈Zr \0

Figure 3: Creating a triangle code from a d × d surface code
by extending from a corner. In the diagram, ancilla qubits are
prepared in |+i (gray) or |0i (white). Then, the stabilizers of the
triangle code are measured O(d) times. The code is always in
the +1-eigenstate of the dashed plaquettes and the product of
dashed loops and solid loops that together make up a plaquette
of the triangle code. Thus, syndromes from half of the triangle
code stabilizers in the xy- and yz-planes can be used reliably
for decoding. The effective distance of this procedure is d.

code
triangle
rotated
triangle
rotated

syndrome
ideal
ideal
noisy
noisy

X threshold
≈ 10%
≈ 10%
≈ 3.2%
≈ 3.2%

X-Z threshold
≈ 10%
≈ 10%
≈ 2.6%
≈ 3.2%

Table 1: Numerical threshold estimates for the triangle and
rotated surface codes show appreciable differences only for noisy
syndrome measurements and bit-phase flip noise (bold).

The minimum weights of the logical operators are respectively, dx = s+t−1, dy = r+t−1, and dz = r+s−1.
We describe symmetric triangle codes that have parameters r = s = t = (d + 1)/2 by the adjective distance-d.
Triangle codes may also be more directly constructed
from a surface code (and vice versa). This is not entirely surprising when the corners of the surface code
are viewed as twists [28]. A fault-tolerant method to
perform this conversion is shown in Fig. 3. Indeed, in
our notation and with our conventions, a d × d surface
code is precisely a d × 1 × d triangle code.
So far we have described triangle codes as topological codes, but we have not yet proved that a threshold
for storing quantum information exists. In Appendix A,
we show such a threshold exists through a straightforward argument analogous to that for the toric code [2].
For the purpose of comparison with the surface code,

j∈Zs

3

we also estimate thresholds for the triangle code and rotated surface code [5] families under phenomenological
noise. We consider both bit (X) and bit-phase (X-Z) flip
storage errors and measurement models where the measured syndromes are ideal or noisy. Table 1 summarizes
the results, and Appendix A provides more detail on the
simulation.
We now turn to syndrome extraction circuits for the
triangle codes. The key notion here is that of effective
distance. We say that the effective distance of a syndrome extraction circuit is d if no fewer than d faulty
circuit components (e.g. single-qubit gates, two-qubit
gates, preparations, measurements) can create a logical error on the data, while at the same time a trivial
syndrome is measured. This implies being able to correct any set of bd/2c faults given the syndrome, because
no two such sets can have the same syndrome. We will
assume the depolarizing noise model for faults when designing these circuits.
A d × d surface code possesses a very simple method
[5] for syndrome extraction with effective distance d under depolarizing noise, using an optimal number of ancilla qubits – one per stabilizer check – and an optimal
number of timesteps – six, if we say coupling the ancilla to all four data qubits takes four total timesteps
and initialization and measurement each take another.
This procedure can leave two-qubit errors on the data
from a single fault (commonly called a “hook” error [2])
but such errors are oriented such that d hook errors are
required to write a logical error onto the data (see Appendix B).
We might hope that the triangle code, being for the
most part surface code, also supports as simple a syndrome extraction. This is nearly the case. By bruteforce check of the distance-3 symmetric triangle code,
we actually find no fault-tolerant procedure using both
the minimal number of qubits and the minimal number
of timesteps. This suggests we have to think a little more
creatively to find a simple syndrome extraction circuit
for the triangle codes. Luckily, we do not have to use
too many more resources. Two qubits in addition to
the allotted one per stabilizer check suffice to perform
full-distance extraction on the triangle code. In fact,
amortized over many rounds of syndrome extraction, our
protocol also uses the minimal number of timesteps per
round, six.
Our syndrome extraction circuit is shown in Fig. 4.
The design uses the standard scheduling of the surface
code [5] within a plane, and staggers the timing of different planes to avoid conflicts in coupling to the data
qubits. To achieve fault-tolerance to the maximum number of depolarizing faults, even this is not enough, however. For example, just two hooks can cause the weight
three error Z(1,0,0) Z(0,0,0) Z(0,1,0) and the remaining d−3
Paulis making up Z̄ (considered equivalently with support across the x- and y-axes) can be caused by single
qubit faults. Thus, Z̄ may be written onto the data with

Figure 4: A schematic of the syndrome measurement on the
triangle code. The arrows show the order (tail to head) in
which an ancilla couples to the data after it is initialized. Two
plaquettes adjacent to the pivot are endowed with flag qubits
to detect hook errors, as described in Fig. 5. The inset shows
that syndrome extraction can be fit together so, over many
cycles, the amortized time per complete syndrome extraction
is six timesteps. The three planes (labeled xz, yz, xy) are
measured two timesteps offset and starred (*) stabilizers, the
plaquettes adjacent to the origin, begin their measurement cycle
two timesteps earlier than the rest of their plane to avoid time
conflicts when coupling to the data.

only d−1 faulty circuit components. On the other hand,
reducing the distance by one is actually the worst that
can happen in this design (see Appendix B). A larger
triangle code using 3(d + 1)2 /4 + 1/4 qubits (for even
d), still with asymptotic qubit count of 3d2 /4, will perform at effective distance d even when syndromes are
extracted using just one ancilla per check.
If we wish to make syndrome extraction for a distanced triangle code with effective distance d, we can detect
hook errors by creating and decoding 2-CATs (see Fig. 5)
for (any) two of the plaquettes adjacent to the origin.
This efficiently deals with the case noted above, where a
pair of hook errors near the origin can write three errors
onto the data, and is represented in Fig. 4 as a pair of
ancillas in two of the central plaquettes.
Neither syndrome extraction with 2-CATs nor extraction on a larger code are ideal for distance three, if the
goal is to make the most qubit-efficient fault-tolerant architecture with high pseudothreshold. In Sec 5, we create a syndrome extraction circuit specialized to distance
three using one ancilla per check.
4

develop full-distance alternatives.
We present three different approaches that achieve
full-distance initialization and measurement. Each approach results in a different scheme in Sec. 4 for computing with the triangle codes. We feel each has something
to offer and we discuss tradeoffs later. The first two are
motivated by the correspondence of the center of the triangle code with a twist (see Sec. 2), and the association
of corners of the surface code with twists [28]. The last
is a simple use of Shor’s measurement [31] with locality constraints. In Sec. 5, we focus on the distance-3
triangle code, for which we have developed specialized
alternatives to these schemes.
Let us briefly describe and name each approach to
initialization and measurement. The first we call code
conversion (CC), because it works by using Fig. 3 to
convert between the surface code, for which initialization
and measurement procedures are simple and known, and
the triangle code. This actually moves any logical state
between the surface code and the triangle code. Notice,
however, that this is stronger than necessary if all we
want is to initialize or measure a Pauli eigenstate. For
this reason, the second method, called basis-state conversion (BC), uses fewer qubits to convert a Pauli basis
state from the surface to triangle codes or measure the
basis-state transversally. The final method, employing
CAT states (CS), is the most qubit efficient but least
time efficient. We detail each of these in turn now.
To understand the CC approach, notice that a distance 2d + 1 triangle code admits transversal measurement of X̄, Ȳ , and Z̄ with effective distance d by simply
measuring all qubits in the X-, Y -, or Z-bases. Initialization of a state in the distance 2d + 1 triangle code can
also be done by initializing a d × d surface code patch
(for which there are known procedures [5, 10] with effective distance d) and then extending the patch using
Fig. 3. This procedure is very much based on the surface code, and so storing data with distance ≥ d could
be done without ever converting to the triangle code at
all. However, the embedding of the surface code patch
in a large triangular patch is important for performing
single-qubit Clifford gates, as explained in Section 4.
In our next approach, BC, we also prepare a basis
state, say |0̄i, in a d × d surface code, but instead of
treating this surface code as 1/3 of a triangular patch,
we treat it as 2/3, the xz- and yz-planes say. Conversion to the surface code can then be done by ceasing
measurement of the loop operators along the bottom
of the surface code, and measuring the stabilizers of a
(d + 1)/2 × (d + 1)/2 × d triangle code O(d) times (see
Fig. 6). Regardless of the initial state of the new qubits,
this process has effective distance d, since X̄ must always
cross the original d×d surface code patch, whose Z-type
stabilizers are always reliable throughout the conversion.
A Z̄ error is ignorable since we are preparing |0̄i. After
this conversion, symmetrize the triangle code, so that we
are left with the symmetric, distance-d code, by measur-

Figure 5: The conventional single-qubit syndrome measurement (top row) and the flagged syndrome measurement (bottom row) both take six timesteps (including preparation and
measurement). The gates •—• in this example of measuring
a Z-type plaquette are controlled-Z. In Fig. 4, we suggest using the flag qubits on two plaquettes near the pivot to achieve
full-distance syndrome extraction.

3 Initialization and measurement
The fact that triangle codes are not CSS complicates
their initialization and measurement protocols. This is
actually the biggest challenge to computing with them.
Gates, in contrast, which are discussed in detail in Sec. 4,
can be performed with a combination of known lattice
surgery techniques [23] supplemented with 1-bit teleportation [30] and, for non-Cliffords, magic-state injection
and distillation [19].
As an example of the complications that arise in measuring a non-CSS code, consider attempting to deduce
the eigenvalue of Z̄ by measuring all qubits of a symmetric, distance-d triangle code in the Z-basis. The parity
of the qubits across the top of the code should equal
Z̄. But can we error-correct this value with maximum
distance? In fact, we cannot. Because we measured all
qubits in the Z-basis, we are lacking the information
from the central mixed-type stabilizer. Thus, a string
of X errors from the origin to the top of the code is an
undetectable weight (d + 1)/2 < d error that causes our
measurement to fail. In general, if we have any syndrome
measurement scheme that fails to report all the values
in a complete set of stabilizers, we can find a string of
errors from the unreported stabilizer to an edge (sometimes using the central twist or dislocation to change
type) that has weight less than d and anticommutes
with the logical operator being measured. As a special case, performing logical measurement by measuring
individual qubits only will certainly leave a stabilizer
unreported and so cannot achieve maximum distance.
Thus, we can either be satisfied with a noisy, but simple, logical measurement (perhaps in an implementation
with extremely reliable single-qubit measurements), or
5

init. & meas. scheme
code conversion (CC)
basis-state conv. (BC)
CAT states (CS)

qubits/log.
2

3d + O(d)

H, S CNOT
O(d)

O(d)

2

9d /4 + O(d) O(1)

O(d)

2

O(d2 )

6d /4 + O(d) O(1)

Table 2: Comparing three strategies for planar Clifford computation in triangle code geometry with distance d. Compared
quantities are qubit counts per logical qubit (including ancillas
needed for gates) and Clifford gate times.

lateral triangles, each having the potential to encode a
qubit as per Fig. 2(b). However, the size of these code
patches, and also which patches encode computational
data and which must act as ancillas used for gates, varies
depending on the initialization and measurement protocol used from Sec. 3. So, we present three designs that
vary in these ways, and thus also vary in how space efficiently data is stored and how time efficiently gates are
performed on that data (see Table 2 and Fig. 7).
In Fig. 7(a), we show the first of our three designs
corresponding to the CC method of initialization and
measurement. Indeed, in this design we actually prefer
to use the surface code (1/3 of a triangular patch) as our
resting code, holding the data between gates. Standard
lattice surgery [23] suffices for performing CNOT gates
between the surface code patches. However, the large
triangular patches become important when we wish to
perform single-qubit Clifford gates.
The method of performing single-qubit gates is shown
in Fig. 9. Through a composition of 1-bit teleportation
(Fig. 8) and code conversion (Fig. 3), we can place Ȳ
on the edge of the surface code. Enforcing the relabeling Ȳ → X̄, while keeping Z̄ fixed performs the S̄ †
gate. If we instead performed 1-bit teleportation into
the top sector of Fig. 9(b), we perform the gate H̄ S̄ † H̄,
completing a set of single-qubit Cliffords. We can also
get H̄ directly by the composition of three 1-bit teleportations to move |ψ̄i around the twist (in either direction). These operations on patch-encoded qubits are
analogous to how hole-encoded qubits are braided with a
twist (here the triangle’s center) to produce logical gates
[28].
The fact that we can perform the whole Clifford group
on surface codes within a triangular patch layout is quite
relevant to surface code research. Indeed, besides state
distillation, there is only one other method we are aware
of for performing S on planar surface code patches [33],
and it effectively involves conversion to the color code
through folding [34]. It seems the triangle code offers
a more natural approach, albeit with a not insignificant
cost of 3d2 + O(d) physical qubits per logical.
Lower overhead computation can be achieved by using
the triangle code as the resting code. Our second design
Fig. 7(b) uses the BC scheme of initialization and measurement. In this case, whenever we want to measure

Figure 6: Converting a d × d surface code (in this case d = 5
with the top two rows of qubits omitted) to a (d + 1)/2 ×
(d + 1)/2 × d triangle code. To do so, stop measuring the
bottom loops (here the two X-type ones) and start measuring
the stabilizers of the triangle code (dashed skeleton) for O(d)
cycles. The initial state of the new qubits is not relevant to the
effective distance, but one might be able to correct more higher
weight errors if they were initialized as, for instance, a collection
of 2-qubit CAT states or as a (d−1)/2×(d−1)/2 surface code.

ing its stabilizers and ceasing to measure the extraneous
stabilizers in the topmost rows. Again, the logical operator Z̄ can occur from fewer than d faults but is irrelevant.
Logical measurement is done by inverting the last step
— extend the triangle code along the z-axis d/2 steps,
and measure all qubits in the Z-basis.
The CS method [31] to initialization and measurement
is probably the most straightforward. Using a row of d
ancilla qubits along an edge of a distance-d triangle code,
we can create and verify a d-CAT state for measuring
the logical operator also lying along that edge. Creating the d-CAT with local operations takes d timesteps
(e.g. by measuring two-bit parity checks starting from
|+i⊗d [32]), and during this process, we must be collecting syndromes from the patch. We must also repeat
the CAT state measurement O(d) times to reliably measure the logical state, leading to O(d2 ) time for logical
measurement. Initialization is essentially the same process, using O(d2 ) time to measure a logical operator O(d)
times and the stabilizers O(d2 ) times to project the code
onto the desired logical state.

4 Planar, nearest-neighbor computation
with triangles
With initialization and measurement protocols created,
our next priority is to perform the Clifford group on triangle codes. Inevitably, by desiring to implement the
two-qubit gate CNOT, we are forced to consider the
layout of several triangle codes within the same planar
geometry. The basic design is to tile the plane with equi6

Figure 9: Performing S † on a d × d surface code patch embedded in 1/3 of a triangular patch as in Fig. 7. Colored arrows represent the directions of logical Paulis X̄ (red), logical
Z̄ (blue), and logical Ȳ (green). In (a), we prepare an ancilla in
|0̄i and project onto the +1-eigenspace of X̄A X̄D of the ancilla
and the data (thick, red line). In (b), we project what was the
original data sector to |0̄i, completing the 1-bit teleportation
(see Fig. 8) of |ψ̄i to the ancillary sector. In (c), we extend the
surface code to the full triangle code of distance 2d + 1, using
Fig. 3, then, in (d), shrink the code back down to the original
sector. In the end, Ȳ is located on the edge that originally held
X̄. Thus, Ȳ → X̄ and Z̄ → Z̄, so we have implemented S̄ † .

Figure 7: Tessellating patches of triangle code capable of complete Clifford computation with effective distance d, corresponding to using (a) code conversion (CC) (b) basis-state conversion
(BC) and (c) CAT states (CS) for initialization and measurement. In a resting configuration, the shaded regions represent
patches of physical qubits that are encoding data, while blank
areas represent ancillary patches. In (a) the resting code is actually the surface code, and the triangular patches (with qubit
layout as in Fig. 2(b)) are present only to facilitate single-qubit
gates. In (b), we use two ancilla patches per data patch to
perform gates, because initialization and measurement use 2/3
of a neighboring patch. In (c), we add ancillary qubits between
patches to make CAT states for initialization and measurement,
and so require just one ancillary patch per data patch for arbitrary reorientation and CNOTs with neighboring data patches.

or initialize a patch we require ancilla qubits extending
outside of the triangular region of the patch (see Sec. 3).
Thus, we require a neighboring ancilla patch empty of
data. Moreover, the ancilla must be adjacent to the side
containing the logical Pauli that we want to measure or
initialize an eigenstate of. This influences all of our gate
designs that use specially prepared ancilla patches.
For instance, a projector circuit for CNOT is shown
in Fig. 10. To use this diagram with BC initialization
and measurement necessitates two ancilla patches – (1)
an ancilla patch adjacent to both control and target and
(2) a second ancilla patch adjacent to the first – and,
moreover, that the data patches serving as control and
target have their Z̄ and X̄ sides adjacent to the first
ancilla, respectively. The layout of Fig. 7(b) guarantees
the availability of the two ancillas. To ensure that the
control and target patches are correctly oriented, notice that reorienting data patches can be done using 1bit teleportation in the procedure prescribed by Fig. 11.
When Fig. 7(b) is tessellated, there is just enough room
to reorient any data patch however we like, though not
necessarily in parallel with some of the nearest other
data patches. Both the reorientation and the CNOT
itself take O(d) time.
Single-qubit Clifford gates on the Fig. 7(b) layout can
be done by simply relabeling sides of the code, treating,
for instance, what was the Z̄ side as X̄ and vice versa.
This method of single-qubit gates directly exploits the

Figure 8: A family of circuits for teleporting Clifford gates.
One may choose any two (different) single-qubit Paulis P, Q
and any single-qubit Clifford C (including identity). Then, let
C(R) = CRC † and also let |Ri be the +1 eigenstate of singlequbit Pauli R. In the diagram, the doubled box represents a
projector onto the +1 eigenspace of P ⊗C(P ). Such a projector
is implemented by measuring P ⊗ C(P ) [23] and then applying
a Pauli correction in the case of measuring −1. In this case the
correction would be C(Q) on the lower block.

7

it takes to initialize and measure ancillas for a CNOT
gate (and for reorientation).

5 The smallest triangle code, code comparison, and logical tomography
Our goal in this section is to develop circuits for syndrome extraction, initialization, measurement, and gates
on the smallest, fully fault-tolerant member of the triangle code family.1 We view this as a worthy pursuit because of the qubit savings over the smallest, fully faulttolerant surface code – 13 versus 17. We will also see
that the triangle code provides other advantages, such
as the ability to perform tomography on the encoded
logical qubit, also with only 13 qubits. We calculate
pseudothresholds for our circuits, and find them comparable to the surface code, and better than other small
fault-tolerant designs such as the color code. Thus, even
though we do not claim our circuits are optimal in terms
of depth or pseudothreshold, they at least show by construction that the smallest triangle code has the potential for a small demonstration of fault-tolerance.
Our first task is to create a circuit for syndrome extraction on the distance-3 triangle code. As mentioned
in Sec. 2, we can check by enumeration that this is impossible if we make the harshest demands on space and
time requirements — just 6 ancillas and 6 timesteps are
not sufficient for error-correction on the distance-3 triangle code. Alternatively, the design of Fig. 4 implies 8
ancillas (a total of 15 qubits) and 7 timesteps are sufficient to perform syndrome extraction for distance three.
We now discuss a circuit identity that we can use to reduce those 8 ancillas to 6 (a total of 13 qubits), but with
8 timesteps.
The idea is illustrated in Fig. 12, where extraction
of a loop’s syndrome is interwoven with extraction of
the neighboring plaquette’s syndrome. This ordering
necessitates a CZ gate between the loop and plaquette
ancillas before measuring, but that same CZ gate also
endows the loop ancilla with the ability to detect hook
errors caused by failure of the plaquette ancilla. Ideally,
this CZ gate can be done directly between the ancillas, though this demands high connectivity (degree-5)
for the plaquette ancilla. If degree-4 connectivity is desired, a depth-2 “cascade” of CNOT and CZ gates can
be used to perform the CZ gate between ancillas using a
data qubit as an intermediary. This is still fault-tolerant
(data qubits are not coupled to one another), but will
lower the threshold due to larger circuit depth.
Using interwoven extraction on two plaquettes instead
of 2-CATs provides a circuit for distance-3 syndrome extraction with only 6 ancillas, Fig. 13. For larger distance

Figure 10: A circuit performing CNOT from |ci to |ti in the
spirit of [23]. The ZZ and XX doubled boxes are projectors
onto the +1 eigenspace of those operators. We use this design
specifically for computation in the layout of Fig. 7(b), where
preparing and measuring the ancilla in the Y -basis is most natural, because that is the side of the ancilla patch that is not
adjacent to data.

Figure 11: Reorienting a triangular patch by a reflection using
a composition of two 1-bit teleportations Fig. 8. Colored arrows
indicate the X̄ (red) and Z̄ (blue) sides of a patch, and green
parallelograms between triangles in (a) and (c) indicate projection onto Ȳ Ȳ . Notice that going from (b) to (c) is simply a
relabeling of the ancilla — |+̄i oriented as in (b) is the same
state as |0̄i oriented as in (c). It is possible to view this process
as a non-reorienting Hadamard (implemented by 1-bit teleportation with C = H in Fig. 8) followed by a relabeling Hadamard
(choosing to treat X̄ as Z̄ and vice versa), a composition which
implements logical identity but changes orientation.

symmetry of the triangle code — whatever subsequent
lattice surgery might be done with one side can equally
well be done with another. Notice that for this to work
in concert with two-qubit gates, it is crucial that we have
the aforementioned reorienting protocol.
Our final layout, using CS initialization and measurement, is shown in Fig. 7(c). This approach uses d ancilla qubits positioned between triangles to build CAT
states. In this scenario, logical initialization and measurement can be done without intruding upon neighboring patches, making gates quite simple conceptually.
Fig. 10 suffices for coupling neighboring patches, Fig. 11
for reorienting them, and relabeling sides for single-qubit
Clifford gates. The ancilla qubits do not get in the way
of lattice surgery since we can always extend a triangular patch through them. The downside is the O(d2 ) time

1 The 7-qubit, distance-3 triangle code was actually the first
member of the family discovered by Andrew Cross at IBM
T.J. Watson through enumeration of 7-qubit stabilizer codes [35].

8

Figure 13: Proposed syndrome extraction for the distance-3
triangle code using the minimal number of ancillas. Numbers
indicate the timesteps in which coupling the ancilla to data
occurs. Extraction from the X-type and Z-type plaquettes is
interwoven with extraction on their neighboring loops. If the CZ
gate between interwoven ancillas can be done in one timestep,
then this whole circuit takes 8 timesteps (including preparation
and measurement of ancillas) to extract the complete syndrome
once. However, two subsequent extractions can be performed
in 15 timesteps.

Figure 12: A plaquette stabilizer and loop undergoing syndrome
extraction. The top image and circuit shows the conventional
ordering, where coupling to the loop occurs completely after
coupling to the plaquette. The lower circuit is equivalent (by
circuit identities), but here coupling to the loop is interwoven
with coupling to the plaquette. This rewriting, however, makes a
significant difference to fault-tolerance, because the lower circuit
can detect hook errors (e.g. an X occurring partway on qubit
(x) will propagate a Z onto qubit (y) flipping its measurement)
while the upper cannot.

the process at most three times, will successfully measure Z̄. Since X̄ and Ȳ are also localized around single
plaquettes, similar procedures work for measuring them.
We show pseudothrsholds for measurement of
distance-3 triangle code designs in Tab. 4. They are
lower than the pseudothresholds of transversal gates
shown in Tab. 3. This is to be expected from the slightly
larger circuit depth, caused by having to measure Z̄.
Although a lower measurement threshold is not disastrous (measurement occurs at most once in a singlequbit experiment), we also show that, if necessary, the
pseudothreshold can be raised by adding one additional
qubit. Details are provided at the end of Appendix C.
The most reliable way of initializing the triangle code
is through a non-fault-tolerant circuit followed by postselection. In Fig. 14, we show a depth-2 circuit that can
prepare |0̄i non-fault-tolerantly. Similar circuits exist for
preparing eigenstates of X̄ and Ȳ . To guarantee faulttolerance, Fig. 14 should be followed by postselection on
trivial measurements of the syndrome and of Z̄. Since
this postselection is done only at the beginning of an
experiment, we view it as not too restrictive for a small
fault-tolerant design.
The logical operations we have described here, preparation and measurement in any Pauli basis and errorcorrection, serve to implement essentially any interesting single-logical-qubit experiment on the distance-3 triangle code. For instance, process tomography of logical identity I¯ can be performed by preparing logical
Pauli eigenstates and then performing logical measure-

triangle codes, we leave the question open as to whether
a similarly interwoven circuit suffices for full-distance
extraction. In any case, in the large distance limit, a
two-qubit savings over Fig. 4 is less impactful.
In Tab. 3, we show a comparison of small distance3 fault-tolerant designs by overhead and pseudothreshold for syndrome extraction. These designs were chosen as they satisfy reasonable criteria for a near-term
fault-tolerant qubit: all use less than 20 qubits including ancillas, the connectivity between qubits required
is low, and no design uses postselection to create ancillas during syndrome extraction. The triangle code
performs remarkably well in the comparison, saving two
or four qubits over the surface code with a drop in pseudothreshold of only 3% or 14%, respectively. In Appendix C, we provide more detail on the circuits and
the exact-counting procedure used to determine these
pseudothresholds.
It is also important that we be able to initialize and
measure logical states in the distance-3 triangle code.
It turns out that each of the triangle code designs from
Tab. 3 can perform initialization and measurement using
only the qubits provided. The idea is quite simple: to
measure Z̄ we need only use the mixed-type plaquette
ancilla, because Z̄ = Z(1,0,0) Z(0,0,0) Z(0,1,0) is supported
on qubits adjacent to it. Performing a measurement of
Z̄ before a round of syndrome extraction, and repeating
9

Code

Data Anc. Qubits (#/surf.) Max deg. Lower pseudoth. (#/surf.) Upper pseudoth. (#/surf.)

5-qubit
5-qubit
Color

5
5
7

∗

5-qubit

∗

Color

Surface

5
7
9

3
6
6
12
12
4

8
11
13
17
19
13

(.47)
(.65)
(.76)
(1.0)
(1.1)
(.76)

3

1.02 × 10−5

3

2.55 × 10

−5

3.47 × 10

−5

5.20 × 10

−5

5.80 × 10

−5

7.85 × 10

−5
−5

3
4
6
4

(.05)

1.05 × 10−5

(.04)

(.14)

2.69 × 10

−5

(.10)

3.77 × 10

−5

(.15)

5.70 × 10

−5

(.23)

6.65 × 10

−5

(.26)

9.40 × 10

−5

(.38)

(.49)

1.07 × 10

−4

(.43)

(.19)
(.28)
(.31)
(.43)

Bacon-Shor

9

8

17

(1.0)

3

8.98 × 10

Triangle

7

6

13

(.76)

4

1.05 × 10−4

(.57)

1.22 × 10−4

(.49)

Triangle

7

6

13

(.76)

5

1.57 × 10−4

(.86)

1.92 × 10−4

(.77)

4

1.76 × 10

−4

(.97)

2.23 × 10

−4

(.90)

1.82 × 10

−4

2.47 × 10

−4

(1.0)

Triangle
Surface

7
9

8
8

15
17

(.88)
(1.0)

4

(1.0)

Table 3: A comparison of small, fully fault-tolerant designs across qubit count, maximum degree connectivity required, and
pseudothreshold (under depolarizing noise) for the exREC of a transversal single-qubit gate (e.g. identity). In parentheses, quantities
are written as a fraction of the corresponding surface code quantity. The pseudothreshold upper bounds apply only to the particular
circuits and error model considered, but are useful insofar as they can definitively prove separations between the logical error rates
of different designs. Starred (*) designs use connectivity that is not planar. All designs are capable of logical qubit tomography with
just the qubit resources listed, except for the Bacon-Shor and surface code designs, which are lacking initialization and measurement
in the Y -basis. Although the surface code does possess the largest provable pseudothreshold in our study, it does not do so by
much, and a fewer-qubit triangle code design may prove to be a more practical small logical qubit.

Qubits

Max. Deg.

Lower

Upper

13

4

9.84 × 10−5

1.18 × 10−4

15

4

1.07 × 10−4

1.27 × 10−4

13

5

1.15 × 10−4

1.39 × 10−4

14

5

1.84 × 10−4

2.65 × 10−4

Table 4: A comparison of pseudothresholds for measurement
exRECs of d = 3 triangle code designs. The first three designs
match the three from Tab. 3, and have lower pseudothresholds
for measurement than they do for gates. The last design is
the 13-qubit, degree-5 design augmented by an extra qubit for
measuring the logical operator (see Appendix C, Fig. 23).

ment in a Pauli basis. Tomography of I¯k is the same
with more rounds of error-correction between preparation and measurement. Single-qubit logical Cliffords are
essentially rotations or reflections of the triangle, which
can be done without need for physical Cliffords. If desired for tomographic purposes, physical Cliffords can
be applied to transform to a locally equivalent triangle
code without significantly affecting the circuits for syndrome extraction or measurement. A special case of this
is a transversal, order-3 Clifford gate SH: perform H on
all qubits at positions x > 0 or x = 0, z > 0 and SH
on the central qubit. The resulting code is the same as
the initial triangle code rotated 120◦ counterclockwise.
Since the logical Pauli operators lie along the triangle’s
sides, they are cyclically permuted by this operation.

Figure 14: Creating the |0̄i state in the distance-3 triangle code
can be done with this depth-2 circuit. Light qubits should be
prepared in |0i and dark qubits in |+i. Numbered buttons indicate the timesteps in which gates should be performed. The
notation •— indicates a controlled-Y gate. Although the
gates are pictured acting between data qubits, if the connectivity of the implementation does not cooperate, they can also
be indirectly implemented by CNOT cascades through the ancilla qubits (not shown).

10

6 Conclusion
It is important to keep in mind that, with fault-tolerant
quantum computing experiments still in the nascent
stage, it is difficult to know what constitutes an ideal
scheme for local, planar computation. Instead, it is crucial to develop a broad array of tools for fault-tolerance,
and hope to meet experiments somewhere in the middle sometime in the future. The triangle code, with its
accompanying syndrome extraction circuits and lattice
surgery methods, is another tool in this toolkit.
Indeed, in addition to developing planar computation
with patches of triangle code, we have also used the notion of a triangle code and a twist to improve surface
codes, creating a simple surgery to implement S without state distillation. This is some indication that thinking in terms of triangle codes is worthwhile, even if the
triangle code itself is not the resting code of some topologically fault-tolerant architecture. To expedite logical
gates, future quantum processors might rather be a tessellation of triangles than a grid.
It would be interesting to generalize the triangle codes
to patches with more than one central twist, while still
using only weight-4 plaquette stabilizers. One possibility is to take the 3-dimensional visualization of Fig. 2(a)
and attach more planes of surface code, creating mixedtype stabilizers and twists where necessary. As one example of this process, we find a topologically closed 2dimensional surface (conveniently visualized as the surface of a cube with d qubits per edge) containing 8
twists and encoding two logical qubits with distance d.
This code is topologically distinct from the toric code.
Determining properties or the usefulness of generalized
twist-containing patches such as this, and maybe different topologies encoding even more qubits, is a possible
direction of future research.

Figure 15: The decoding graph for a (single layer of) triangle
code overlaid on the code. Nodes in the graph are located at
each stabilizer (gray dots) and edges are colored blue or red.
Some edges are connected to only one node (or alternatively
are connected to a node at infinity). These are the boundary
edges defined in the text. Also shown in the figure is the order
of syndrome extraction as per Fig. 4.

asymptotic limit, and then discuss our simulation for estimating it. The error model is not based on a circuit
for syndrome extraction. Single-qubit errors on the data
occur with probability p, and a syndrome bit is flipped
with probability q. As is common in these matters, the
estimated threshold is much better than the proven one.
Our argument closely follows that of Dennis et. al. [2]
who prove a threshold for the toric code. The important
differences are (1) our code is not on a closed topological
surface and (2) there is a single decoding graph, rather
than two separate decoding graphs for X and Z errors
(because the triangle code is not CSS). As a consequence
of the latter property, while we can prove a threshold
with magnitude similar to that for the toric code in the
case of uncorrelated X and Z errors, we can prove only
a lower threshold (by about a factor of 36) in the case of
correlated errors (i.e. single-qubit depolarizing noise).
The decoding graph is overlaid on the triangle code
in Fig. 15. To account for errors in measuring the syndrome, we envision a three-dimensional stack of these
decoding graphs, with vertical edges connecting corresponding qubits between the layers. We call edges connected to only one node “boundary edges” and notice
that they can be grouped into three sets corresponding
to the side of the triangle code stack they occupy.
Every set of errors E, in general a combination of
data errors and syndrome errors, can be associated with
a subset of edges P of the decoding graph. The associa-

Acknowledgement
We especially thank Andrew Cross for encouraging us
to study this family of codes, for many helpful discussions, and for performing the topological threshold calculation. This work would not have been possible without his guidance. In addition, we thank Sergei Bravyi,
Isaac Chuang, and Jay Gambetta for discussions and
comments on the manuscript. T.J.Y. acknowledges the
hospitality of IBM T.J. Watson where much of this work
was done. T.J.Y. also thanks the National Defense
Science and Engineering Graduate (NDSEG) fellowship
and NSF RQCC Project No. 1111337 for support.

A Memory threshold
In this appendix, we first prove that the family of triangle codes possesses a fault-tolerance threshold in the
11

where NH,V is the number of paths containing H horizontal and V vertical edges that represent logical errors.
For instance, NH,V = 0 whenever H < d.
While NH,V is difficult to calculate for general H ≥ d
and V , it is trivial to get a satisfactory bound. Along the
boundary of the triangle code stack, which is T layers
tall, there are fewer than T × (3d) boundary edges on
which to start a logical error path P . From there, at
each node we can typically continue the path in one of
at most five directions, three remaining in the same layer
and two changing layers. The exception is at the central
mixed-type node of any layer, where we have at most six
choices. A very rough upper bound is then that there are
NH,V ≤ T ×(3d)×6H+V logical error paths. Putting this
together with Eq. (7), we find that Pr [error] vanishes
in the limit d → ∞ whenever p, q < pth for some pth
that we have now shown is at least 0.7% in the case of
uncorrelated X and Z errors.
When X and Z errors are correlated, or, in other
words, the data-qubit noise model is single-qubit depolarizing noise, then we should
modify property

(2) of the


tion is also true the other way: a subset of edges uniquely
specifies a set of errors. Each data qubit has two associated edges, a blue edge and a red edge. The blue edge
is in P if and only if a Z error occurred on that qubit,
and the red edge is in P if and only if an X error did. A
Y error corresponds to both edges being in P . Vertical
edges between layers correspond to bit flip errors on the
syndrome. Using this correspondence we subsequently
speak of errors as edges without distinction.
We can also relate logical errors to paths on the decoding graph. A logical error corresponds to a path of
length at least d (the code distance) going from one
boundary edge to another boundary edge occupying a
different side of the triangle code. The path may traverse several layers before terminating on another side,
though paths that do are strictly longer than length d.
After T cycles of syndrome extraction, we have accumulated errors E and would like to apply a recovery
operation. A simple strategy, and that considered in
[2], is to apply a recovery Em with Hm horizontal edges
and Vm vertical
edges such that (1) ∂E = ∂Em and


+ Vm log 1−q
is minimal. Here ∂E
(2) Hm log 1−p
p
q
for a set of edges E is the boundary of E, the set of
nodes connected to only one edge in E. Notice that (2)
is defined implicitly for correcting uncorrelated X and
Z errors, because it cares about the number of edges in
Em , rather than the number of affected qubits. We will
change the recovery later to deal with correlations.
What is the probability that a path P consisting of
H horizontal edges and V vertical ones is contained in
E ∪ Em ? If He and Ve are the numbers of horizontal
and vertical edges in E, then P ⊆ E ∪ Em implies that
He + Hm ≥ H and Ve + Vm ≥ V . Accordingly,

H 
V 
Hm 
Vm
p
q
p
q
≥
(4)
1−p
1−q
1−p
1−q

 He 
Ve
p
q
×
.
1−p
1−q

+ Vm log 1−q
is minirecovery to (20 ) Qm log 1−p
p
q
mal. Here Qm is the number of qubits affected by the
recovery. This is not the same as the number of horizontal edges, because each qubit is associated with two
edges, one blue and one red. However, using the same
reasoning as above, we can argue that
X
0
Pr [error] ≤
NQ,V
(4p(1 − p))Q/2 (4q(1 − q))V /2 , (8)
Q,V

0
where now NQ,V
is the number of paths on the decoding
graph containing Q qubits and V vertical edges that also
correspond to a logical error. Each qubit is associated
0
≤ N2Q,V ≤ T × (3d) × 62Q+V .
with two edges, so NQ,V
Accordingly, the threshold is p0th ≥ 0.019% in the case
of depolarizing noise.
In practice, the thresholds are higher than our simple
analytic estimates. The corresponding numerical threshold estimates in Table 1 were calculated in the following way. Storage noise is modeled by applying a channel to each data qubit prior to syndrome measurement.
The noise channel is either a bit flip channel with error
probability p or the composition of bit flip and phase
flip channels, each with error probability p. We do not
consider depolarizing noise since error correction by reduction to minimum weight matching is not maximally
fault-tolerant for the triangle code for that case (instead,
minimum qubit matching as described just above Eq. (8)
would be sufficient, but we make no claims about the efficiency of that). As in [2], we consider two different
syndrome measurement models. The “ideal” model applies memory noise, measures one error-free syndrome,
and performs error correction. The “noisy” model simulates faulty syndrome measurement using a sequence of
d + 1 syndrome measurement rounds. In each of the first
d rounds, we apply memory noise, measure one error-free

Using properties (1) and (2) of the recovery, we know
that the product of the former two factors on the left
side of the inequality is greater than the product of the
latter two. This implies
He
Ve 
H/2
V /2

p
q
p
q
≤
(5)
1−p
1−q
1−p
1−q
The probability E occurs is ≤pHe (1 − p)H−He q Ve (1 −
q)V −Ve , and there are ≤2H+V ways to distribute edges
in P between E and Em . So, we find the bound
Pr [P ⊆E ∪ Em ] ≤ (4p(1 − p))H/2 (4q(1 − q))V /2 . (6)
Summing over the possible logical errors bounds the
probability of a logical error.
X
Pr [error] ≤
NH,V (4p(1 − p))H/2 (4q(1 − q))V /2 , (7)
H,V

12

# of weight d logical strings
code
surface

triangle

errors

d=3

5

7

9

11

X

8

52

296

1,556

7,768

X,Z

16

104

592

3,112

15,536

X,Y,Z

16

104

592

3,112

15,536

X

3

20

95

546

2,583

X,Z

14

86

476

2,462

12,164

X,Y,Z

30

204

1,164

6,072

30,012

Table 5: Counting the number of lowest-weight logical operators that can be created from physical errors of various types.
While the triangle code has fewer lowest-weight logical operators that can be made from just bit or bit and phase errors, it
has many more when correlated errors are allowed.

Figure 16: Logical error rates for bit flip and bit-phase flip noise
with ideal syndrome measurements suggest thresholds near 10%
for both the triangle and rotated codes. Odd code distances
from 3 to 21 are shown, where each point corresponds to either
10,000 or 30,000 Monte-Carlo samples.

results. It is worth noting that the error rate of the
triangle code is generally much lower than that of the
surface code in the presence of only bit flip noise, while
it is close to the same in the case of bit-phase flip noise.
This is roughly consistent, however, with our counts of
lowest-weight logical operators in Tab. 5.

B Effective distance of syndrome extraction
Our goal in this appendix is to (semi-rigorously) argue
that the syndrome extraction circuit in Fig. 4 has effective distance d. That is, there is no set of fewer than d
faults that can cause a logical error. Since Fig. 4 is based
on full-distance extraction for the surface code, we first
review the argument in that case.
Consider the syndrome extraction circuit indicated by
Fig. 18. We aim to show that no set of < d faulty circuit components can cause a logical failure. Because the
surface code is CSS, we can consider X and Z errors
separately, and refer to a Y error as both an X and a
Z. A logical X̄ is simply a string of Xs between the
X-type edges. This implies that, to form X̄, we need at
least one X error per column of data qubits. However,
we can now check that every faulty circuit component
leads to X errors in at most one column. In fact, only
“hook” faults (a failure of the second or third gate coupling an ancilla to data) can even leave more than one
error on the data. If the syndrome extraction for stabilizer s couples to qubits a, b, c, d in that order, then
the errors resulting from hooks take the form ∗c sd and
sa ∗b , where ∗ is any Pauli and sj is the j th Pauli of s.
Hence, the only hooks that can leave two X errors on the
data are from measuring X-type stabilizers. However,
the support of any such hook error lies entirely in one
column, because the measurement pattern of the X-type
stabilizers is N-shaped. Thus, we have shown that any
faulty component only populates at most a single col-

Figure 17: Logical error rates for bit and bit-phase flip noise with
noisy syndrome measurements suggest thresholds near 2.6% for
the triangle code and 3.2% for the rotated code. Odd code
distances 3, 5, 7, and 9 are shown, where each point corresponds
to either 10,000 or 30,000 Monte-Carlo samples.

syndrome, and flip each syndrome bit with probability
p. In the final round, we measure one error-free syndrome. The error correction is computed based on all of
the syndrome outcomes.
An algorithm infers error corrections from syndrome
outcomes by reduction to minimum weight perfect
matching [2]. The edge weights for the matching algorithm are computed differently for the triangle and
rotated codes. We use the Manhattan distance for the
rotated codes and process bit flip errors and phase flip
errors separately. For the triangle code, we construct the
decoding graph shown in Fig. 15, assign each edge the
same weight, and compute the total weight of any path
using Dijkstra’s algorithm. For the “noisy” model, multiple copies of Fig. 15 are joined by edges corresponding
to potential syndrome bit errors.
Fig. 16 and Fig. 17 show plots of all of the simulation
13

To begin, notice that Ȳ must anticommute with any
X̄ or Z̄. Each row of qubits with fixed x-coordinate
x > 0 supports a string of Xs acting as X̄. Thus, since
it must anticommute, Ȳ has an odd number of Zs in
each of these rows. Define an asymmetric surface code,
call it code x, from the qubits in the triangle code with
coordinate x > 0. Notice that Fig. 4 implies that code
x undergoes syndrome extraction with effective distance
(d − 1)/2, because, as described in the case of the surface code Fig. 18, the hooks are correctly oriented. Now,
Ȳ must act like Z̄x (i.e. logical Z for code x) when restricted to code x (that is, when the support of Ȳ not
within code x is ignored). Thus, the full-distance syndrome extraction of code x says that we cannot create
Ȳ with fewer than (d − 1)/2 faults.
We can similarly define a surface code from only the
qubits at coordinates z ≥ 0, code z. By its need to
anticommute with any Z̄ string, Ȳ must act like X̄z
(logical X of code z) when restricted to code z. Since
code z is undergoing full-distance extraction, it takes at
least (d + 1)/2 faults to make Ȳ .
We now combine the two observations that Ȳ acts
like Z̄x and X̄z under the appropriate restrictions. By
restricting to codes x and z, we have disconnected the
X and Z decoding graphs of Fig. 15. Thus, Ȳ restricted
to codes x and z cannot be created with fewer than
(d − 1)/2 + (d + 1)/2 − 1 = d − 1 faults, finishing the
argument for effective distance d − 1.
Now, the location of the mixed-type stabilizers is not
fundamental, and local-Clifford equivalent triangle codes
exist with it orientated along any ray from the origin.
So the argument above could be made with mixed types
along any axis instead of the y-axis. What is necessary
is that the ray of mixed-type stabilizers terminate in a
twist at the origin. Checking hooks at the origin, we
see that two hook faults can cause the weight-3 error
Z(1,0,0) Y(0,0,0) X(0,0,1) , which is three of the supporting
Paulis of
Y
Y
Ȳ = −i
Z(x,0,0)
X(0,0,z) ,
(9)

Figure 18: The pattern for syndrome extraction in the surface
code recommended in [5]. Notice that Z-type stabilizers should
be measured in a pattern perpendicular to the X-type edges,
so that a single hook error cannot spread Z errors to two different rows of data qubits. Likewise, the X-type stabilizers are
measured perpendicular to the Z-type edges.

umn with X-errors, and therefore at least d are needed
to cause X̄. The argument that Z̄ requires at least d
faults to construct is essentially identical. Constructing
Ȳ requires constructing both a column traversing string
of Xs and a row traversing string of Zs. Since X and
Z errors are edges on disconnected decoding graphs, Ȳ
requires at least 2d − 1 faults.
Now consider syndrome extraction Fig. 4 for the
distance-d triangle code. Notice that the planes are simply patches of surface code undergoing syndrome extraction according to Fig. 18, which we know is full-distance.
The fact that syndrome measurement is staggered from
plane to plane can only make it harder to place an undetected logical error using fewer than d faults (since
later measurements may pick up on earlier placed errors). Ignoring the staggered timing, we can still argue
for effective distance d of the syndrome extraction.
The outline of the argument is this: we first argue that
Ȳ cannot be created with fewer than d − 1 faults. By
symmetry, X̄ and Z̄ are are similarly resilient and this
argues that Fig. 4 has effective distance d − 1. Then,
again appealing to symmetry, we note that the only
barrier to achieving effective distance d is the origin.
Finally, case by case analysis of hooks near the origin
shows that some hooks are indeed dangerous (two hooks
can cause a weight three error as noted in Sec. 3 of the
main text) and that using two 2-CATs for syndrome extraction of checks adjacent to the origin is sufficient to
detect the dangerous hooks.

x∈Zs

z∈Zs

with s = (d+1)/2. This implies Ȳ can be made from d−1
faults. To catch this case, introduce 2-CAT decoding
(Fig. 5) on any two of the central plaquettes, so that
any two central hooks can be detected.

C exREC pseudothresholds
Here we discuss the fault-tolerant designs and calculations making up Tab. 3 in the text. All our calculations
are rigorous and performed in the exREC formalism [36].
We therefore report pseudothresholds [37] for computation (albeit for just Clifford gates on a single logical
qubit), as opposed to thresholds for topological memory, which were discussed earlier in Appendix A. Since
such pseudothreshold results are not asymptotic, we consider them more suited to comparing small experiments.
14

did not arise from single faults, they may arise from
double faults, and so we can correct some double faults.
However, we make no attempt to correct the most likely
(assuming circuit depolarizing noise) double faults consistent with a measured syndrome.
There are two properties of the EC constructed this
way that are important. First, it is fault-tolerant in
the sense mentioned above that any single fault in the
exREC does not cause a logical error. Second, it obeys
the Cross-DiVincenzo-Terhal (CDT) criteria [39]. This
guarantees that errors incoming to the exREC will not
affect the logical failure rate, and thus we can ignore
them when calculating pseudothresholds, rather than
performing, for instance, an analysis in the context of
a worst-case input.
As a detail, we note that SE.SE can sometimes be
simplified by further parallelization of the circuit. For
instance, Fig. 13 is one such case, where the depth of
SE.SE is one less than twice the depth of SE. We perform
such simplifications when possible, but do not endeavor
to simplify SE.SE.SE if it occurs. This is because in
general it cannot be decided whether the third SE should
be applied before the second has completely finished.
Having laid out the general procedure for building the
EC gadget, we need to now specify SE for each design.
We present one SE for each code, and mention the variants, which are straightforward. Afterward, we discuss
the counting of malignant faults necessary to actually
rigorously bound the pseudothresholds.
Syndrome extraction on the 5-qubit code [41, 42] is
typically done with verified 4-CAT states. However, we
find verification unsuitable for a small fault-tolerant design, since it requires postselection. In principle, the
verification can be removed by decoding the CAT states
before measurement [43]. But if we are going to use
decoding, there is a more compact strategy using just
3-CATs. In fact, just one set of three ancillas suffices,
as shown in Fig. 20, since they can be prepared repeatedly in a 3-CAT state to measure all stabilizers. This
is notable as it is the smallest completely fault-tolerant
design that we know of, using just 8 qubits including ancillas. Variations on this design using more ancillas are
possible, such as using two sets of three ancillas (which
is still planar) and four sets of three (which is not), to
increase parallelism of the syndrome extraction and correspondingly the threshold.
For the smallest color code, equivalent to Steane’s
code [27], it has been suggested that 2-CATs are sufficient for full-distance syndrome extraction [16, 44]. Indeed we find this to be the case, if we decode the 2-CATs
to detect hook errors. In fact, if we did not decode, the
high symmetry of the 7-qubit code renders any undetected hook error fatal. The smallest fault-tolerant planar design is shown in Fig. 21 where each face possesses
two ancillas. These must be prepared and reprepared in
2-CAT states to measure all stabilizers (since each face
represents both an X-type and Z-type stabilizer). If in-

Figure 19: An exREC [36] consists of a logical gate gadget Ga
sandwiched between two error-correction gadgets EC. The gates
we consider are transversal, so Ga is simply a depth-1 circuit
of single-qubit gates. The EC gadgets are more complex and
described in the text. Ideal decoding (dotted circles) after the
first and second ECs allows one to determine the Pauli operator
L, which depends on faults that have occurred in the exREC, but
not, if the CDT criteria [39] are satisfied, on incoming errors Ein
(here assumed, without loss of generality, to contain no logical
errors). If L is the identity, no fault has occurred, but X, Y , or
Z signals failure of the exREC. Counting the number of ways
failure occurs from ≤ 2 faults gives our pseudothreshold bounds.

Eventually one may want to scale up the calculation to
simulate the error rates of small algorithms (such as is
considered in [38]) made from several exRECs.
In the exREC formalism it is important to create an
error-correction (EC) circuit that can recover from any
(d − 1)/2 faults in the preceeding gate (Ga) or the preceeding EC. In particular, for distance-3, any single fault
in the so-called exREC circuit EC.Ga.EC must not lead
to a logical error. A logical error in turn is defined as
when an ideal decoding of the state after the trailing
EC differs from the expected state Ga|ψi given that an
ideal decoding after the leading EC revealed state |ψi
(see Fig. 19).
All our EC gadgets for distance-3 codes are constructed in the same way. First, define a syndrome extraction (SE) circuit unique to a given design. Then
perform SE.SE obtaining two copies of the syndrome. If
these syndromes match, the EC gadget is complete, and
we attempt to deduce an appropriate recovery (a Pauli
operator). If the syndromes do not match, we repeat
SE once more, and then attempt recovery. The recovery
is never explicitly applied; we simply adjust the Pauli
frame [40].
We have to specify how a recovery operator is deduced, often called “decoding” the syndrome. Because
we are dealing with finite-sized codes designed specifically for a small demonstration of fault-tolerance, we advocate table lookup for maximum pseudothreshold. The
construction of the table proceeds in two steps. First,
EC must be able to correct all errors arising from a single fault that it introduces itself, either immediately or,
if the error gets through, in the next round of EC. We
can enumerate these cases by brute force simulation of
the Clifford exREC circuit, and add them to the table.
If ever there are two or more errors with the same syndrome but which commute differently with the logical
operators, then we know the SE is not fault-tolerant
and must redesign it. The second step of filling the
table is to take unused syndromes and assign to each
the lowest weight Pauli recovery that corrects the latest
syndrome measured. Although these syndrome patterns
15

Figure 21: A 6-ancilla design for the smallest color code. With
only degree-3 connectivity (light-gray edges), this layout provides fully fault-tolerant syndrome extraction by creating and
decoding 2-CATs.

Figure 20: A layout of the 5-qubit code (black circles) and
ancilla qubits (gray, prepared as |+i, and white, prepared as
|0i) overlaid with the circuit for measurement of a single stabilizer XZZXI. The gates inside the dotted triangle are performed twice, both before and after the gates outside the triangle. For fault-tolerance the order of all gates is otherwise
irrelevant, though it will change the decoding table. All ancilla
qubits are measured afterward in the same basis they were prepared. Light lines in the background indicate the required qubit
interaction graph for an entire SE cycle, which is planar and
only degree three.

est threshold. We also consider the 4-ancilla version, in
which plaquette ancillas are reused to measure loops, because it uses 13 total qubits and so offers an equal-qubit
comparison to our smallest triangle code design.
Once we have completely specified the exREC for a design, we can rigorously bound the logical error rate. Our
error model is standard. Single-qubit operations including identity gates fail with X, Y , or Z with probability
p/3 while two-qubit gates fail in one of 15 Pauli ways
with probability p/15 each. Single-qubit preparation of
|0i or |+i fails (by a Pauli error X or Z, respectively)
with probability p. Measurement in either the X- or Zbasis fail (by reporting the wrong bit) with probability
p. All circuit components succeed or fail independently.
Counting malignant sets proceeds similarly to [36],
though our bounds are calculated using different
(slightly tighter) formulas. We can calculate the quantities

stead we introduce four ancillas per face such that the
X- and Z-syndromes might be extracted more in parallel
(e.g. the ancillas for Z-type can now be prepared while
those for X-type are being measured), we lose planarity
but increase the threshold.
The Bacon-Shor code is unique in our study as it is
a subsystem code. When syndrome extraction is performed with ancilla codeblocks, its threshold is one of the
highest known [45]. But as pointed out in [45], we can
exploit the subsystem structure to measure only weighttwo operators, also called gauge operators, to deduce
the syndrome. Since weight-two measurements cannot
introduce more than weight-one errors to the data, this
procedure is naturally fault-tolerant. To minimize ancilla reuse, while keeping under 20 total qubits (our cutoff for “small” fault-tolerant designs), we use a total of
eight ancillas, Fig. 22. SE consists of measuring all Xtype gauge operators once, followed by measurement of
all the Z-type gauge operators.
We have described several SE designs for the triangle code in Section 5. The three in Tab. 3 are (1) the
two 2-CAT design suggested by the distance-3 version of
Fig. 4, (2) the degree-5 version of Fig. 13 wherein plaquette ancillas can interact directly with neighboring loop
ancillas, and (3) the degree-4 version of Fig. 13 wherein
the ancillas interact only via a data qubit intermediary.
The surface code SE is taken from [5]. There they
conclude that the 8-ancilla version possesses the high-

(2)

Pfail = Pr [L 6= I, ≤ 2 faults] ,

(10)

(2)
Psucc
= Pr [L = I,

(11)

≤ 2 faults]

(where I is the 2 × 2 identity) by enumerating all sets
of at most two faults and determining L (see Fig. 19)
for each. The probability that a particular set of faults
occurs is the product of the probabilities for the faulty
components failing and for all other components succeeding.
Defining Pfail = Pr [L 6= I], we then see the bounds,
(2)

(2)
Pfail ≤ Pfail ≤ 1 − Psucc
.

(12)

By the fault-tolerance of our designs, Pfail = O(p2 ),
and likewise with the upper and lower bounds. So the
pseudothreshold pth found by solving Pfail (pth ) = pth is
16

Figure 22: The 3 × 3 Bacon-Shor code with 8 ancilla qubits.
Overlaid are the coupling gates required to measure an X-type
gauge operator (to the left) and a Z-type gauge operator (right)
when the ancillas are prepared and measured in the X-basis.
Light-gray lines indicate the degree-3 connectivity required for
full syndrome extraction.

Figure 23: Measuring Ȳ using one extra qubit beyond Fig. 13.
Gates are labeled with the timesteps in which they should be
applied. The extra qubit is prepared (during timestep zero) in
|+i and the loop ancilla for the mixed-type loop is prepared in
|0i so that the first CNOT creates a 2-CAT state for measuring
Ȳ . This allows the loop ancilla to be measured and reprepared
in |+i to measure the loop stabilizer in accordance with the
scheduling of Fig. 13. Thus, measuring Ȳ and all the stabilizers
takes no more timesteps than measuring just the stabilizers.

bounded by the solutions to
(2)

Pfail (pupp ) = pupp ,

(13)

(2)
1 − Psucc
(plow ) = plow

(14)

The MEC also consists of repeated syndrome extraction, but one that measures the eigenvalue of a logical
Pauli P̄ in addition to the syndromes of all stabilizers.
Call this extraction an MSE. Then, an MEC consists of
two repeats of the MSE, which is followed by another
MSE if the first two did not match. The decoding table of the MSE is constructed just as before for the SE,
but, because the initial logical state is unknown, the P̄
values measured cannot provide information about the
error directly — only when they change across different
MSEs is it relevant.
The MSE can in principle be done in many different
ways. For instance, the procedure described in Section 5
reuses the plaquette ancilla in the xy-plane to do the
P̄ = Z̄ measurement. In Fig. 23, we show how a measurement with one extra ancilla qubit can be done. The
counting of malignant sets also proceeds similarly as the
gate case, except that final logical errors of P̄ are not
considered failures.

like plow ≤ pth ≤ pupp .
Note that counting sets of faults is complicated by the
fact our EC is non-deterministic (the third application of
SE is conditional on the first two not matching). Thus,
(2)
(2)
to calculate Pfail and Psucc we must break each into four
cases. This amounts to the identities
X
(2)
Pfail =
Pr [L 6= I, ≤ 2 faults, i-EC1 , j-EC2 ] (15)
i,j∈{2,3}

X

(2)
Psucc
=
Pr [L = I, ≤ 2 faults, i-EC1 , j-EC2 ] ,
i,j∈{2,3}

(16)
where i-EC1 indicates that the first EC consists of two
(i = 2) or three (i = 3) SE, and likewise with j-EC2
for the second EC. The probabilities in the sums can be
calculated by simulating all sets of at most two faults in
a circuit with an i-EC1 and a j-EC2 and then keeping
only the sets of faults which cause syndromes that are
consistent with the presence of an i-EC1 and a j-EC2 .
Having discussed gate exRECs, we briefly describe the
procedure for calculating the error rate of measurement
exRECs, which we performed for the small triangle code
designs in Tab. 4. A measurement exREC is set up similarly to Fig. 19, except that the second EC is replaced
by a measurement EC, or MEC. Thus, the measurement
exREC includes both the final single-qubit gate in the
circuit and the measurement.

References
[1] Sergey B Bravyi and A Yu Kitaev. Quantum codes
on a lattice with boundary. quant-ph/9811052,
1998.
[2] Eric Dennis, Alexei Kitaev, Andrew Landahl, and
John Preskill.
Topological quantum memory.
Journal of Mathematical Physics, 43(9):4452–4505,
2002. DOI: 10.1063/1.1499754.
17

[3] Austin G Fowler, Matteo Mariantoni, John M
Martinis, and Andrew N Cleland. Surface codes:
Towards practical large-scale quantum computation. Physical Review A, 86(3):032324, 2012. DOI:
10.1103/PhysRevA.86.032324.
[4] Dorit Aharonov and Lior Eldar. On the complexity
of commuting local Hamiltonians, and tight conditions for topological order in such systems. In Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS), 2011 IEEE
52nd Annual Symposium on, pages 334–343. IEEE,
2011. DOI: 10.1109/FOCS.2011.58.
[5] Yu Tomita and Krysta M Svore. Low-distance surface codes under realistic quantum noise. Physical
Review A, 90(6):062320, 2014. DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevA.90.062320.
[6] David S Wang, Austin G Fowler, and Lloyd CL Hollenberg. Surface code quantum computing with error rates over 1%. Physical Review A, 83(2):020302,
2011. DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevA.83.020302.
[7] Adrian Hutter, James R Wootton, and Daniel Loss.
Efficient Markov chain Monte Carlo algorithm for
the surface code. Physical Review A, 89(2):022326,
2014. DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevA.89.022326.
[8] Sergey Bravyi, Martin Suchara, and Alexander
Vargo. Efficient algorithms for maximum likelihood decoding in the surface code. Physical Review A, 90(3):032326, 2014. DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevA.90.032326.
[9] James R Wootton and Daniel Loss. High threshold error correction for the surface code. Physical Review Letters, 109(16):160503, 2012. DOI:
10.1103/PhysRevLett.109.160503.
[10] Austin G Fowler and Simon J Devitt.
A
bridge to lower overhead quantum computation.
arXiv:1209.0510, 2012.
[11] Héctor Bombı́n. Topological subsystem codes.
Physical Review A, 81(3):032301, 2010. DOI:
10.1103/PhysRevA.81.032301.
[12] Sergey Bravyi, Guillaume Duclos-Cianci, David
Poulin, and Martin Suchara. Subsystem surface
codes with three-qubit check operators. Quantum Information & Computation, 13(11-12):963–
985, 2013.
[13] Héctor Bombı́n and Miguel Angel Martin-Delgado.
Topological quantum distillation. Physical Review
Letters, 97(18):180501, 2006. DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.97.180501.
[14] Héctor Bombı́n.
Gauge color codes:
optimal transversal gates and gauge fixing in
topological stabilizer codes.
New Journal of
Physics, 17(8):083002, 2015. DOI: 10.1088/13672630/17/8/083002.
[15] Aleksander Kubica and Michael E Beverland. Universal transversal gates with color codes: A simplified approach. Physical Review A, 91(3):032330,
2015. DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevA.91.032330.

[16] Andrew J Landahl and Ciaran Ryan-Anderson.
Quantum computing by color-code lattice surgery.
arXiv:1407.5103, 2014.
[17] Robert Raussendorf and Jim Harrington. Faulttolerant quantum computation with high threshold in two dimensions.
Physical Review Letters, 98(19):190504, 2007. DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.98.190504.
[18] H Bombin and MA Martin-Delgado. Quantum
measurements and gates by code deformation.
Journal of Physics A: Mathematical and Theoretical, 42(9):095302, 2009. DOI: 10.1088/17518113/42/9/095302.
[19] Sergey Bravyi and Alexei Kitaev. Universal quantum computation with ideal clifford gates and noisy
ancillas. Physical Review A, 71(2):022316, 2005.
DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevA.71.022316.
[20] Austin G Fowler, Simon J Devitt, and Cody Jones.
Surface code implementation of block code state
distillation. Scientific reports, 3, 2013. DOI:
10.1038/srep01939.
[21] Austin G Fowler, Ashley M Stephens, and Peter
Groszkowski. High-threshold universal quantum
computation on the surface code. Physical Review A, 80(5):052312, 2009. DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevA.80.052312.
[22] Austin G Fowler. Time-optimal quantum computation. arXiv:1210.4626, 2012.
[23] Clare Horsman, Austin G Fowler, Simon Devitt,
and Rodney Van Meter. Surface code quantum
computing by lattice surgery. New Journal of
Physics, 14(12):123011, 2012. DOI: 10.1088/13672630/14/12/123011.
[24] Héctor Bombı́n. Topological order with a twist:
Ising anyons from an Abelian model.
Physical Review Letters, 105(3):030403, 2010. DOI:
10.1103/PhysRevLett.105.030403.
[25] Matthew B Hastings and A Geller. Reduced spacetime and time costs using dislocation codes and arbitrary ancillas. Quantum Information & Computation, 15(11-12):962–986, 2015.
[26] A. R. Calderbank and Peter W. Shor. Good quantum error-correcting codes exist. Phys. Rev. A, 54:
1098–1105, 1996. DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevA.54.1098.
[27] Andrew M Steane. Error correcting codes in quantum theory. Phys. Rev. Lett., 77(5):793, 1996. DOI:
10.1103/PhysRevLett.77.793.
[28] Benjamin J Brown, Katharina Laubscher, Markus S
Kesselring, and James R Wootton. Poking holes
and cutting corners to achieve Clifford gates with
the surface code. arXiv:1609.04673, 2016.
[29] H Bombin and MA Martin-Delgado. Optimal
resources for topological two-dimensional stabilizer codes: Comparative study. Physical Review A, 76(1):012305, 2007. DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevA.76.012305.
18

[30] Daniel Gottesman and Isaac L Chuang. Demonstrating the viability of universal quantum computation using teleportation and single-qubit operations. Nature, 402(6760):390–393, 1999. DOI:
10.1038/46503.
[31] Peter W Shor.
Fault-tolerant quantum computation.
In Foundations of Computer Science, 1996. Proceedings., 37th Annual Symposium on, pages 56–65. IEEE, 1996.
DOI:
10.1109/SFCS.1996.548464.
[32] Peter Brooks and John Preskill. Fault-tolerant
quantum computation with asymmetric BaconShor codes. Physical Review A, 87(3):032310, 2013.
DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevA.87.032310.
[33] Jonathan E Moussa. Transversal clifford gates on
folded surface codes. Physical Review A, 94(4):
042316, 2016. DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevA.94.042316.
[34] Aleksander Kubica, Beni Yoshida, and Fernando
Pastawski. Unfolding the color code. New Journal
of Physics, 17(8):083026, 2015. DOI: 10.1088/13672630/17/8/083026.
[35] Andrew W Cross. personal communication.
[36] Panos Aliferis, Daniel Gottesman, and John
Preskill. Quantum accuracy threshold for concatenated distance-3 codes. Quantum Information &
Computation, 6(2):97–165, 2006.
[37] Krysta M Svore, Andrew W Cross, Isaac L Chuang,
and Alfred V Aho. A flow-map model for analyzing pseudothresholds in fault-tolerant quantum
computing. Quantum Information & Computation,
6(3):193–212, 2006.
[38] Daniel Gottesman.
Quantum fault tolerance in small experiments.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:1610.03507, 2016.
[39] Andrew W Cross, David P Divincenzo, and Barbara M Terhal. A comparative code study for quantum fault tolerance. Quantum Information & Computation, 9(7):541–572, 2009.
[40] Emanuel Knill. Quantum computing with realistically noisy devices. Nature, 434(7029):39–44, 2005.
DOI: 10.1038/nature03350.
[41] Charles H Bennett, David P DiVincenzo, John A
Smolin, and William K Wootters. Mixed-state entanglement and quantum error correction. Physical
Review A, 54(5):3824, 1996. DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevA.54.3824.
[42] Raymond Laflamme, Cesar Miquel, Juan Pablo
Paz, and Wojciech Hubert Zurek. Perfect quantum
error correcting code. Physical Review Letters, 77
(1):198, 1996. DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.77.198.
[43] David P DiVincenzo and Panos Aliferis. Effective
fault-tolerant quantum computation with slow measurements. Physical Review Letters, 98(2):020501,
2007. DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.98.020501.
[44] Ashley M Stephens. Efficient fault-tolerant decoding of topological color codes. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1402.3037, 2014.

[45] Panos Aliferis and Andrew W Cross. Subsystem
fault tolerance with the Bacon-Shor code. Physical Review Letters, 98(22):220502, 2007. DOI:
10.1103/PhysRevLett.98.220502.

19

