                                                                                                           www.nature.com/scientificreports




                        OPEN          In Silico Non-Homologous End
                                      Joining Following Ion Induced DNA
                                      Double Strand Breaks Predicts That
Received: 23 October 2017
Accepted: 25 January 2018             Repair Fidelity Depends on Break
                                      Density
Published: xx xx xxxx



                                      N. T. Henthorn 1, J. W. Warmenhoven1, M. Sotiropoulos                      1
                                                                                                                     , R. I. Mackay2, N. F. Kirkby1,3,
                                      K. J. Kirkby1,3 & M. J. Merchant1,3
                                      This work uses Monte Carlo simulations to investigate the dependence of residual and misrepaired
                                      double strand breaks (DSBs) at 24 hours on the initial damage pattern created during ion therapy. We
                                      present results from a nanometric DNA damage simulation coupled to a mechanistic model of Non-
                                      Homologous End Joining, capable of predicting the position, complexity, and repair of DSBs. The initial
                                      damage pattern is scored by calculating the average number of DSBs within 70 nm from every DSB.
                                      We show that this local DSB density, referred to as the cluster density, can linearly predict misrepair
                                      regardless of ion species. The models predict that the fraction of residual DSBs is constant, with 7.3% of
                                      DSBs left unrepaired following 24 hours of repair. Through simulation over a range of doses and linear
                                      energy transfer (LET) we derive simple correlations capable of predicting residual and misrepaired
                                      DSBs. These equations are applicable to ion therapy treatment planning where both dose and LET are
                                      scored. This is demonstrated by applying the correlations to an example of a clinical proton spread out
                                      Bragg peak. Here we see a considerable biological effect past the distal edge, dominated by residual
                                      DSBs.


                                      The induction of DNA double strand breaks (DSBs) is the mechanism by which radiation kills cells; with DSBs
                                      either repaired, misrepaired, or left unrepaired (residual). Misrepaired DSBs, considered potentially lethal
                                      lesions1, can lead to chromosome-type or chromatid-type aberrations, which are experimentally measurable2.
                                      These aberrations cause genomic instability, contributing to the chance of cell death3 and development of second-
                                      ary cancers. Residual DSBs are likely to cause cell cycle arrest if detected by the various cell cycle checkpoints. The
                                      unresolved residual DSBs will cause cell death, and residuals that are missed by the G2/M checkpoint will cause
                                      the cell to undergo mitotic catastrophe. For this reason residual DSBs are conventionally considered to contribute
                                      substantially to the likelihood of cell death3.
                                          A difference in the cell killing effectiveness between radiation qualities has previously been noted in the liter-
                                      ature4,5, where a greater effect is seen for higher linear energy transfer (LET) radiations. Clinically it is important
                                      to understand this difference as it impacts the required dose for tumour control between radiation qualities, such
                                      as photons and protons. In practice, this is accounted for by use of the proton relative biological effectiveness
                                      (RBE), which is the ratio of proton dose relative to photon dose to achieve iso-effectiveness. An RBE value of 1.1
                                      is in clinical use to give the physical proton dose that is biologically equivalent to the required photon dose6,7.
                                      However, it has been shown that the proton RBE is variable depending on a number of factors including dose,
                                      fraction, α/β ratio, and LET8. Marshall et al.9 have recently shown that consideration of RBE variation along a pro-
                                      ton Spread Out Bragg Peak (SOBP) results in increases in both the delivered dose and range when compared to a

                                      1
                                       Division of Molecular and Clinical Cancer Sciences, Faculty of Biology, Medicine and Health, University of
                                      Manchester, Manchester, UK. 2Christie Medical Physics and Engineering, The Christie NHS Foundation Trust,
                                      Manchester, UK. 3The Christie NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester, UK. N. T. Henthorn and J. W. Warmenhoven
                                      contributed equally to this work. Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to J.W.W. (email:
                                      john.warmenhoven@postgrad.manchester.ac.uk)


        SCiENTiFiC REPOrTS | (2018) 8:2654 | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-21111-8                                                                                1
www.nature.com/scientificreports/


                              constant RBE. To fully exploit the beneficial dose deposition characteristics of protons over photons, the variable
                              RBE must be understood and incorporated into Treatment Planning Systems (TPS).
                                   RBE has been linked to LET, where the LET of a particle is defined as the energy deposited per unit length.
                              An increase in LET is equivalent to an increase in the number of ionisations in the same distance. In the context
                              of particle therapy, a higher LET causes a greater number of DSBs10 as well as a higher complexity of DSB11. The
                              proximity between DSBs is also dependent on the LET, with high LET leading to more proximal breaks due to
                              the closer spacing between energy depositions12. Assuming irradiation in the same cell line and cell cycle phase,
                              i.e. same α/β or simplistically “the same biology”, then the differences in the success or failure of the cell’s DNA
                              damage response (DDR) depends only on these three DSB factors; the number of, complexity of, and proximity of
                              DSBs, regardless of the radiation quality used. Similar statements have been expressed in other work, for example
                              the Local Effects Model (LEM)13,14.
                                   Break complexity and proximity have both been suggested to influence misrepair15. It has been proposed that
                              either a class of DSB exists that has a propensity for causing aberrations16,17, or that misrepair occurs through
                              pairwise interaction of DSBs dependent on their proximity18. The influence of DSB proximity on chromosome
                              aberrations has been reviewed previously19 and has been investigated experimentally20. Determining the distance
                              over which these DSB interactions occur is of importance for mechanistic models of DNA repair21,22. However,
                              predictions for the value of this DSB separation varies within the literature; with values ranging from 0.25 µm to
                              1.30 µm12,23–27. The motion of DSB ends has a large impact on this value and is a debated topic in the literature.
                              Some experimental work has shown that DSB ends in metazoan have limited motion in the nucleus and are
                              unable to explore the entire volume28,29, travelling less than 0.5 µm in a 10 µm diameter nucleus30. On the other
                              hand, evidence has also been published to suggest greater mobility of DSB ends31, particularly along the tracks
                              of damage caused by heavy ions31,32. More directed motion has also been suggested by Neumaier et al., reporting
                              the observation of repair centres in human cells33. To fully understand the consequence of how DSB end mobility
                              leads to chromosome aberrations a more detailed repair model must be used.
                                   Averbeck et al.34 have shown that DSBs induced across the carbon Spread Out Bragg Peak (SOBP) are effi-
                              ciently repaired, although there is an increase in cell death. The authors attribute this increase to a greater number
                              of misrepaired DSBs, highlighting the role of misrepair in RBE. It is known that, for the same cell line, the RBE
                              with different ion species at the same LET (iso-LET) is substantially different35. This implies that the change in
                              RBE of ions arises from differences in track structure36, the energy deposition pattern at the nanoscale. This can
                              explain both DSB complexity and proximity, information that is not fully encompassed by the LET alone. The
                              concept of track structure leading to biological outcomes is a core principle of the emerging field of nanodosim-
                              etry37. To our knowledge, no study has assessed the difference in misrepair induction between ion species and
                              across a range of LET relevant to the clinical setting.
                                   In this work, Monte Carlo simulations are used to predict the damage and repair of cells irradiated by protons,
                              alpha particles, and carbon ions at a range of iso-LET. By scoring the average number of DSBs within close prox-
                              imity of each other we are able to show a linear relation to misrepair across all the radiation qualities. We believe
                              that this local DSB density, which we refer to as the cluster density, can be used as a predictor of chromosome
                              aberrations. The residual DSBs at 24 hours of repair are also investigated. Our model predicts a constant fraction
                              of DSBs left unrepaired, regardless of ion type, dose, or LET. From analysis of the results, we have developed cor-
                              relations that are capable of predicting the yield of residual and misrepaired DSBs for our model. These correla-
                              tions express the impact that the physics of the beam, dose and LET, has on the early biological effect, misrepaired
                              and residual DSBs at 24 hours. The trends displayed by these correlations for misrepair and residual DSBs have a
                              relevance to proton therapy planning.
                                   It is recognised that the work contained here covers a wide range of fields which not all readers may be familiar
                              with. We include a table summarising the field specific terms used (Supplement 1).

                              Methods
                              Simulation of DSBs.           This work uses the Monte Carlo based toolkit Geant4 (10.02 patch 01)38, with the
                              default G4EmDNAPhysics list. Incerti et al. have presented and validated the parameters of this physics list39,
                              which has been used in a number of published DNA damage simulations40–42. The Geant4-DNA extension accu-
                              rately models event-by-event particle tracking down to low energies, simulating each track as a series of steps
                              determined by physical interactions.
                                  We use this toolkit to simulate the transport of different ion species across a water medium representing a sim-
                              plified cell model. Using water as a surrogate for biological material has become a standard assumption in Monte
                              Carlo studies of DNA damage43. The cell geometry consists of a 5 µm diameter spherical nucleus, as might be typ-
                              ical of a lymphocyte44, in the centre of a 10 µm box, used as a surrogate for the cellular cytoplasm. A uniform aver-
                              age dose is delivered to the cell through methods described in Supplement 2. DSBs are calculated according to the
                              principles of nanodosimetry through assessing the clustering of energy depositions within the nucleus. This work
                              follows the methodology of Francis et al.45, where assumptions are made in order to convert energy depositions
                              into strand breaks. The methodology assumes that a fraction of the nucleus is occupied by the sensitive material
                              (DNA backbones). We determined the sensitive fraction of the nucleus as 15% by fitting the predicted initial yield
                              of DSBs to literature data40,42,46–48, Supplement 3. The cell model implicitly considers indirect damage by fitting the
                              sensitive fraction to literature data that includes indirect effects. In our model energy depositions in the sensitive
                              volume above 37.5 eV are guaranteed to cause strand damage, whilst energy depositions below 5 eV cannot cause
                              strand damage, with the probability increasing linearly across this range46. An accepted damage site is randomly
                              assigned to strand 1 or 2 of the double helix and the position is recorded. Following the simulation of all primary
                              particles, to achieve the required dose, the list of damage sites is analysed by a clustering algorithm based on
                              a modified implementation of the Density-Based Spatial Clustering of Applications with Noise (DBSCAN)49


SCiENTiFiC REPOrTS | (2018) 8:2654 | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-21111-8                                                                                2
www.nature.com/scientificreports/


                              algorithm. The algorithm determines DSBs by clustering damage sites that are on opposite strands and separated
                              by a maximum distance of 3.32 nm, equivalent to the separation of 1 helical turn (10 bp)50.
                                  A separate simulation of the chromatin fibre is used to determine the structure of individual DSBs, most of the
                              details of which were reported in our previous work51. We build a model of the double helix, with backbones and
                              bases modelled as quarter cylinders and half cylinders52 with volumes of 0.28 nm3 and 0.13 nm3 respectively. The
                              double helix is wound around cylindrical histones in 1.65 left-handed turns to form the nucleosome, which are
                              then arranged in the solenoid chromatin conformation53. The chromatin is irradiated with primary ions match-
                              ing the energy of those used in the cell model. For each incident ion, energy depositions are cumulatively scored
                              in the DNA volumes and the same energy dependent probability of damage induction is applied (5–37.5 eV).
                              Indirect damage is included with use of the Geant4-DNA chemistry modules54. Hydroxyl radicals crossing a DNA
                              backbone or base are assigned a probability of inducing damage, with the probability fitted to produce 65% strand
                              damage due to indirect effects when the fibre is irradiated by a 60-Co source46. DNA volumes damaged by direct
                              and/or indirect effects are recorded per primary particle. The damaged volumes are analysed by an improved
                              clustering algorithm, since both the genomic separation between damage sites and their strand is known. This
                              removes any discrepancy that may arise due to damaged backbones within 3.32 nm but separated by more than
                              10 bp. A damaged base is included in the cluster if it is between 3 bp of the extreme ends of the backbones involved
                              in the break11. Damaged bases directly attached to a damaged backbone are not included in the cluster since it is
                              assumed that these will be removed along with the backbone during repair. The process is repeated for at least 106
                              primary ions recording details of the induced DSBs per primary to develop a break complexity library.
                                  The results of the cell and fibre model are combined to give the positions of DSBs, calculated as the central
                              coordinate of the damage sites in the cluster, and the break complexity, defined as the number of extra SSBs and
                              base lesions included in the break. This damage data is then passed to our repair model.

                              Non-Homologous End Joining Repair Model.                      The geometric distribution and complexity of DSBs are
                              used to convert each DSB into two pseudo-molecules representing exposed DNA strand ends. Ends are allowed
                              to move within the cell nucleus by sub-diffusive motion, where mean squared displacement scales with time as
                              tα, with α < 1. This has been shown experimentally to better model DSB end mobility compared to Brownian
                              motion29. We have assumed the continuous time random walk implementation of sub-diffusion55. In this method
                              DSB ends are assigned a random waiting time drawn from an exponential distribution, during which they do
                              not move. After this waiting time, the end is displaced in a random direction with length drawn from a Gaussian
                              distribution, and a new waiting time is assigned. Any proposed step leaving the nuclear envelope is rejected and
                              resampled.
                                  Simultaneous to their motion, DSB ends undergo a series of stochastic time constant based state changes. Each
                              change of state represents the recruitment and action of a particular protein or complex of proteins, implicitly
                              assumed to be randomly distributed throughout the nucleus. Time constants are fitted to reproduce the known
                              recruitment kinetics of these proteins or complexes of proteins. We have chosen to model only the canonical
                              non-homologous end joining (c-NHEJ) process as it is computationally less intensive; the impact of this is dis-
                              cussed later. The c-NHEJ process has an agreed core group of proteins which bind sequentially during repair56.
                              DSB ends are initially placed with no associated proteins. The ends then either change to an inhibited state or to
                              a state with Ku70/80 attached. The inhibited state represents attachment of proteins from competing processes
                              occupying the DSB end and prevent Ku70/80 from binding. Once a DSB end has recruited Ku70/80 it cannot
                              freely dissociate back to a naked DSB end57, but must progress to a state with DNA-PKcs attached. Once a DSB
                              end has recruited Ku70/80 and DNA-PKcs (DNA-PK complex) it cannot dissociate to a previous state58. Two
                              ends in the DNA-PK complex state, that are within 25 nm, can react to form a long range synaptic complex59. In
                              this complex DNA-PKcs can cross/auto-phosphorylate, and in turn phosphorylate Ku70/8057. The synaptic com-
                              plex can either dissociate to two DSB ends with no attached proteins, or move to a short range synaptic complex
                              state59. Dissociation occurs with a short time constant resulting in only transient formation of the long-range
                              complex59. We have used this model to reproduce results of fluorescent recovery after photo-bleaching (FRAP)
                              experiments reported in the literature58. Once in a short range synaptic complex state the repair pathway cleans
                              all extra lesions associated to the break before final ligation can occur, with time constants taken from literature26.
                              The final ligation step represents the actions of XLF, XRCC4, DNA-Ligase IV, and polymerases. The c-NHEJ
                              repair model allows us to investigate correctly and incorrectly repaired DSBs, as well as the number of residual
                              DSBs for a given repair time. The full details of this repair model will be published separately at a later date.

                              Data availability. The datasets generated during and/or analysed during the current study are available from
                              the corresponding author on reasonable request.

                              Results
                              Misrepair and LET.         The cell model was irradiated with 1, 2, or 5 Gy of protons, alphas, and carbon-126+
                              across a range of track averaged linear energy transfer (LETt). The NHEJ model was run for a repair time of
                              24 hours, tracking motion, protein recruitment, and the repair of DSB ends. The fraction of DSBs that misrepaired
                              was recorded, calculated as a fraction of the DSBs that are joined at 24 hours. Figure 1a shows a difference in
                              misrepair between the three ions investigated, with the difference becoming more pronounced at higher values
                              of LETt. Similar values for the fraction misrepaired are seen between different doses, though there is a difference
                              in the absolute number misrepaired. Carbon-126+ and alpha particles show relatively similar behaviour, however,
                              protons have a higher fractional misrepair. We investigate this difference in terms of the repair pathway and the
                              ion induced damage patterns.
                                  Within the c-NHEJ model only two DNA-PK complexes can undergo synapsis, causing possible misrepair.
                              Ku70/80 has a high affinity for naked DSB ends, and once loaded rapidly recruits DNA-PKcs60–62. The recruitment


SCiENTiFiC REPOrTS | (2018) 8:2654 | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-21111-8                                                                                3
www.nature.com/scientificreports/




                              Figure 1. (a) The average misrepair of DSBs as a fraction of total DSBs joined at 24 hours at a range of LETt for
                              protons (p), alphas (α), and carbon-126+ (C). A dose independent difference in misrepair between iso-LETt
                              ions is shown. Carbon-126+ shows anomalous behaviour between LETt of 20–30 keV/µm, discussed later. Error
                              bars show the standard error in the mean between 200 repeat simulations. Lines show second order polynomial
                              fits to guide the eye. (b) The DSB separation probability density function for iso-LETt protons (p), alpha (α),
                              and carbon-126+ (C) in a 5 µm diameter spherical nucleus. The distributions show the probability that another
                              DSB is located at a given separation from any DSB. Differences are only seen at small separations (inset), due
                              to separations between intra-track DSBs. (c) The DSB end displacement at 24 hours. Showing that 95% of
                              DSB ends move 168 nm or less in 24 hours. This limits DSB interactions to nearby neighbours where the DSB
                              separation distribution is different between the ions.



                              of Ku70/80 is largely unaffected by break complexity62, and both Ku70/80 and DNA-PKcs are abundant in the cell
                              making depletion of local concentrations near composite break sites unlikely63. Therefore, in the model there is a
                              similar and rapid formation of DNA-PK complexes at break sites, regardless of the radiation quality used. As such
                              this cannot explain the difference in misrepair observed.
                                  Different particles at iso-LETt produce different track structures as they pass through the nucleus. The result-
                              ant difference in the energy deposition pattern leads to differences in DSB complexity. To determine the influence
                              of break complexity on misrepair for a single ion species, the repair model was rerun for two cases; one populated
                              with only simple DSBs and one populated with only complex DSBs. The predicted misrepair fraction for either
                              case is not different from the data in Fig. 1a (Supplement 4). Furthermore, we investigate the effect that break
                              complexity has on our ability to differentiate misrepair between ions species, using the same cases as above. For
                              the data in Fig. 1a, the differences in misrepair are statistically indistinguishable below an LETt of 5 keV/µm.
                              Neither case alters this value, showing that within our model the simulated break complexity does not impact
                              misrepair.
                                  A further implication of the different energy deposition patterns is a difference in the spatial distribution of
                              the DSBs themselves. We assess proximity between DSBs by determining the probability that a DSB is within a
                              radial distance from another DSB. Figure 1b shows the probability density functions (PDF) of DSB separation for
                              the three ion species at an iso-LETt, equivalent to the distal edge of the proton SOBP (≈27 keV/µm). A non-zero
                              probability for separations of 0 µm is shown since it includes DSBs that are separated between 0 and 10 nm.


SCiENTiFiC REPOrTS | (2018) 8:2654 | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-21111-8                                                                             4
www.nature.com/scientificreports/




                              Figure 2. (a) The average number of DSBs separated by less than 70 nm from any given DSB (cluster density)
                              and the corresponding misrepair at 24 hours for protons (p), alphas (α), and carbon-126+ (C). Showing a
                              linear relation (R2 > 0.9) with fitting parameters presented in Table 1. Error bars represent the standard error
                              in the mean between multiple repeat simulations (2500 for cluster density, 200 for misrepair). (b) Fraction of
                              DSBs left unrepaired following 24 hours of repair across the LETt range investigated. The solid line shows a
                              constant residual fraction of 0.073. Dashed lines show the standard deviation in this value. Error bars are the
                              standard error in the mean for 200 repeats. (c) The predicted number of DSBs per unit dose for protons, alphas
                              and carbon-126+ as a function of LETt, with lines showing linear fits for protons and alphas. There is a clear
                              discontinuity in carbon-126+ data. Error bars are the standard error in the mean for 2500 repeats. Due to the
                              anomalous behaviour of carbon-126+, its data is not used to determine any correlations but is included in the
                              plots for interest only.



                              Similarities at larger DSB separations are seen, indicating that it is equally probable to have DSBs separated by
                              a value greater than around 0.5 µm. Below 0.5 µm a difference can be seen between the ions, due to separations
                              of intra-track DSBs. Here, we see a greater probability of proximal DSBs in the proton-irradiated cell compared
                              to the alpha and carbon-126+ case. The importance of this scale is further established in Fig. 1c. This shows that
                              the end displacement in 24 hours, 95% moving less than 168 nm, limits interactions to nearby breaks only and
                              coincides with the DSB separations for which the iso-LETt ions are different. As such break proximity can explain
                              differences in misrepair.

                              Cluster Density, Misrepair, and Residual DSBs. To quantify the initial damage patterns, the average
                              neighbouring DSBs within a given radius for each DSB is determined, which we refer to as the “cluster density”.
                              If motion of DSB ends is predominantly responsible for misrepair, then this value scales with the number of
                              potential incorrect partners a DSB end has available for interaction. The cell model was irradiated with the same
                              radiation qualities as shown in Fig. 1a, and the average cluster density was calculated for 2500 repeat simulations.
                              We find that the cluster density has the strongest correlation to misrepair when calculated with a radial distance
                              of 70 nm, giving a minimum in χ2. However, the strength of this correlation is not greatly decreased by deviations
                              of ±30 nm from this value (Supplement 5). Figure 2a shows a strong linear relation between cluster density and
                              misrepair. This shows that the local DSB concentration (cluster density) in the initial damage pattern is predictive


SCiENTiFiC REPOrTS | (2018) 8:2654 | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-21111-8                                                                              5
www.nature.com/scientificreports/


                               Parameter        Proton ± %            Alpha ± %
                               a                  0.1966 ± 0.4         0.1966 ± 0.6
                               b                   0.008 ± 3.4          0.008 ± 3.4
                               c                  0.0736 ± 0.2         0.0736 ± 0.2
                               d                   1.149 ± 1.0           1.02 ± 2.5
                               e                   24.10 ± 0.6           20.2 ± 1.3
                               f                4.879E-4 ± 0.8        3.25E-3 ± 5.0
                               g                 2.84E-3 ± 4.7        1.61E-3 ± 33
                               h                 5.13E-2 ± 1.6        5.51E-2 ± 5.7

                              Table 1. The correlation fitting parameters developed in this work for protons and alphas with their asymptotic
                              standard error shown as a percentage error.



                              of the misrepair at 24 hours in our model. Based on our results, we suggest this physico-marker can be used to
                              indicate the impact that beam parameters have on biological response. Cluster density can be estimated from the
                              ion LETt though a fitted second order polynomial (Supplement 6), with parameters given in Table 1. Generally,
                              higher LETt results in a higher cluster density, with protons producing a higher cluster density relative to iso-LETt
                              alphas (a similar trend as seen in Fig. 1a).
                                  In the context of radiotherapy, residual DSBs are another biological endpoint of interest. Our model predicts
                              that the fraction of residual DSBs following 24 hours of repair is constant across the radiation qualities investi-
                              gated, with an average of 7.3% breaks left unrepaired. Figure 2b shows that this constancy holds across the ion
                              species, dose, and LETt range investigated.
                                  To apply the misrepair and residual correlations to a clinically relevant case, and to make predictions of abso-
                              lute yields, the number of DSBs is determined as a function of LETt and Dose. For the clinically relevant LETt
                              range of 0–20 keV/µm we observe a linear correlation to initial DSB yield for protons and alphas (Fig. 2c). This lin-
                              ear trend has been reported in the literature for both ions46,48,64. The DSB yield for alpha particles begins to deviate
                              from linearity above ≈30 keV/µm. However, in the rest of this work we only use the correlation between the
                              bounds of its linearity. The constant fraction of residual DSBs at 24 hours combined with the linear dependence
                              of initial DSB yield on LETt leads to a linear relationship between the yield of residuals and LETt (Supplement 8);
                              this has been experimentally observed for 53BP1 foci under similar conditions by Chaudhary et al.65, although
                              at a systematically lower yield. Potential causes for this are discussed later. The parameters for all correlations are
                              given in Table 1.
                                  The DSB yield for carbon ions is linear up to ≈20 keV/µm, after which there appears to be a discontinuity, also
                              noticed by other users of Geant4-DNA (personal communication S. McMahon). The behaviour originates from
                              a switching between relativistic and classical calculations in the Geant4-DNA models. This may have implica-
                              tions for studies simulating clinical carbon ions (Supplement 7). It is possible to use only relativistic calculations,
                              though this has not been validated by the Geant4-DNA collaboration, and further implications are unknown.
                              As such we have chosen to use the default Geant4-DNA models and not include carbon-126+ data in any of the
                              correlations.

                              Residual and Misrepaired DSB Yields. Here we present the correlations from Fig. 2a,b and c. We convert
                              the correlations of fractional misrepair and residual DSBs into absolute yields, shown in equations (4) and (6). In
                              order to apply the correlations to an example of a clinical proton SOBP, we determine the dependency on dose
                              and LETt, shown in equations (5) and (7).
                                                                       FMis. = a ⋅ Cluster Density + b                                            (1)

                                                                                      FRes. = c                                                   (2)

                                                                           NDSB = D ⋅ (d ⋅ L + e)                                                 (3)

                                                      Misrepair Yield = NDSB × {a ⋅ Cluster Density + b} × {1 − c}                                (4)

                                                        D ⋅ (d ⋅ L + e) × {a ⋅ [f ⋅ L2 + g ⋅ L + h] + b} × {1 − c}                                (5)

                                                                         Residual Yield = NDSB × c                                                (6)

                                                                             D ⋅ (d ⋅ L + e ) × c                                                 (7)
                                  Equations 1–7: Fres is the fraction of DSBs that are unresolved at 24 hours, Fmis is the fraction of DSBs that are
                              misrepaired at 24 hours, NDSB is the initial number of DSBs induced by the exposure, Cluster Density is the aver-
                              age number of neighbouring DSBs within a 70 nm radius, L is the track averaged linear energy transfer in units of
                              keV/μm, D is the dose in units of Gy, and a-h are parameters determined through best fitting, the values of which
                              are reported in Table 1 for protons and alphas.


SCiENTiFiC REPOrTS | (2018) 8:2654 | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-21111-8                                                                                 6
www.nature.com/scientificreports/




                              Figure 3. The correlation predicted yield of misrepaired, equation (5), and residual, equation (7), DSBs across
                              the clinically relevant proton LETt range, with a constant dose of (a) 1 Gy, (b) 2 Gy, and (c) 5 Gy. Points show
                              values measured within the simulation. Error bars in the yield are the standard error in the mean of 200 repeats.
                              Error bars in the LETt are the standard error in the mean for 50,000 repeats. Both yield and LETt error bars are
                              too small to be seen on this scale.




                              Figure 4. (a) The depth dose (solid) and LETt (dashed) profile of an example proton SOBP with 2 Gy across
                              the plateau comprised of nine pristine Bragg peaks. (b) The predictions of residual and misrepaired DSB yields
                              for the same proton SOBP, calculated with equations (7) and (5) respectively. The ratio of residual DSBs to
                              misrepaired DSBs is shown as a dashed line. The solid black vertical line on both graphs denotes the depth
                              where the physical dose begins to fall off (15.58 cm).



                                  Figure 3 shows how the yield of residual and misrepaired DSBs predicted by equations (5) and (7) increases
                              across a clinically relevant LETt range65 whilst keeping dose constant. The plotted data points show the results
                              of our model and show good agreement with the correlations derived earlier. There is a difference in behaviour
                              between the predicted yield of residual and misrepaired DSBs, with misrepaired DSBs becoming more important
                              at high LETt.
                                  The proton SOBP depth dose and LETt profile is simulated using the Geant4 “QGSP_BIC” physics list
                              (Fig. 4a). Here, the SOBP is simulated from the combination of nine pristine Bragg peaks, where the maximum
                              proton energy is 150 MeV. Using equations (5) and (7), the expected yields of misrepaired and residual DSBs per
                              nucleus is calculated with proton depth (Fig. 4b). Due to low proton fluence there is increasing noise in LETt at
                              the distal end of Fig. 4a. However, since the dose in this region is negligible the noise in LETt doesn’t impact our
                              predictions. The undulation of the plateau is due to combination of the 9 pristine Bragg peaks. Figure 4b shows
                              a gradual increase in residual and misrepaired DSBs across the SOBP, with a more pronounced peak at the distal
                              end. After this, the yields of residual and misrepaired DSBs fall off at a slower rate than physical dose, resulting
                              in biological effect at low dose regions past the SOBP. Interestingly, the peak of residual DSBs coincides with


SCiENTiFiC REPOrTS | (2018) 8:2654 | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-21111-8                                                                             7
www.nature.com/scientificreports/


                              the distal edge of the dose plateau whilst the peak of misrepaired DSBs is situated at a slightly increased depth.
                              Combined with Fig. 3 this demonstrates the higher sensitivity that misrepair events have to LETt. For this 2 Gy
                              SOBP misrepaired DSBs are always predicted at a lower yield than residual DSBs; however, the plotted ratio shows
                              that the relative importance of misrepair is highest at the distal edge.

                              Discussion
                              In this work, we demonstrate plausible mechanisms which, combined, lead to the conclusion that the early bio-
                              logical effect of radiation depends on the extent to which DSBs are clustered, shown with the cluster density.
                                  The fraction of misrepaired DSBs can be predicted by cluster density; independent of ion type, dose, LETt, and
                              break complexity. The cluster density produced by different ion species is not the same for the same LET values
                              (Fig. 1b), and therefore produce different early biological effect (Fig. 1a). We suggest that this can explain the
                              experimentally observed differences in cell kill and mutation caused by different ion species at iso-LET35. This
                              cluster density dependent response is the result of three factors: the time required for an exposed DNA end to be
                              prepared for re-joining, the motion of these broken ends during this time, and the fact that formation of synaptic
                              complexes depends on co-localisation of two DSB ends. The diffusion of breaks will likely result in separation of
                              initially co-localised correct partners and, in regions of high DSB density, increases the possibility of co-localising
                              with an incorrect partner. We quantify this in terms of cluster density. The cluster density can be estimated from
                              LETt for a given ion type (Supplement 6) and is dose independent. Only intra-track DSBs are proximal enough to
                              contribute to the cluster density. We do not see any considerable numbers of DSBs formed as a result of inter-track
                              energy depositions, which we have investigated up to 5 Gy (data not shown).
                                  Our model predicts that the fraction of DSBs left unrepaired is constant; independent of ion type, dose, and
                              LETt (Fig. 2b). This arises due to the tight confinement of DSB ends around their initial break site, Fig. 1c. Only
                              a small fraction of DSB ends are able to escape this confinement, and are then unlikely to meet another end.
                              The escaping fraction is solely a product of the sub-diffusive motion and therefore not dependent on the beam
                              parameters. The number of initial breaks has a linear relationship with dose and with LETt, we therefore predict
                              that the absolute yield of residual DSBs scales linearly with these factors. This is in agreement with current clinical
                              practice, where treatment plans use dose as a surrogate for cell kill. Furthermore, it lends weight to the concept
                              of LET optimisation.
                                  Individual NHEJ pathways are thought to respond to different break complexities66. Our repair model only
                              contains the DNA-PKcs dependent c-NHEJ pathway, capable of resolving simple and complex breaks. For this
                              reason the kinetics of our model were fitted to experimental data from laser generated complex DSBs58. The
                              model omits DNA-PKcs independent pathways, which resolve simple breaks and have been suggested to com-
                              plete faster66. However, the above mechanism of misrepair is still applicable for these pathways, since they also
                              require time dependent recruitment of proteins to mobile ends before synapsis between co-localised partners.
                              Differences would arise in the time required to prepare ends for re-joining, leading to a difference in the radius
                              at which the cluster density should be determined. This means that our cluster density radius is likely an misesti-
                              mation for fully NHEJ capable cells. The effect of this is somewhat dampened by the fact that some proportion of
                              these simple DSBs can be resolved by c-NHEJ. We therefore do not expect the addition of DNA-PKcs independ-
                              ent repair pathways to substantially impact the results presented.
                                  The recruitment kinetics of Ku70/80 and DNA-PKcs are fitted to laser irradiated in vitro Xrs6 and V3 cells
                              with c-NHEJ pathways58. Repair kinetics are fitted to proton irradiated in vitro AG01522 cells65. As such the
                              response of our model is not representative of a specific cell type. However, it can be shown that the mechanism
                              of cluster density dependent misrepair holds for any NHEJ capable cell type, following the same justification as
                              above. The induction of DNA damage in this model is fitted to the DSB yields of other in silico models for a range
                              of cell types40,42,46–48, with a constant nucleus size of 5 µm diameter. Therefore, any deviation from this size will
                              change the DSB density, as the same number of DSBs will be distributed across a different volume. The initial
                              damage is therefore also not representative of any specific cell type. A misestimation in the initial DSB yield would
                              lead to misestimation in the yields of residual and misrepaired DSBs. A misestimation in the DSB density would
                              lead to changes in the cluster density, and consequently in the fraction of misrepaired DSBs. However, potential
                              misestimation only changes the initial yield, not the mechanism of cluster density dependent misrepair. Given
                              all of the above, we would expect the correlations detailed in this work to hold for both end points in any NHEJ
                              capable cell, but with cell specific changes in the predicted yields. This change in yield, but not in trends, could
                              explain the systematically lower yield of residual DSBs compared to the experimental results of Chaudhary et al.65.
                                  The model does not include the Homologous Recombination (HR) pathway which is an “error free” pathway
                              available to cells occupying the relevant cell cycle stages. It has been shown that NHEJ is a faster repair pathway
                              than HR67, and is dominant throughout the cell cycle67. The core c-NHEJ proteins, DNA-PKcs and Ku70/80, have
                              similar, rapid, recruitment kinetics throughout the cell cycle58. Phosphorylation of these recruited proteins causes
                              dissociation from DSB ends, in our model this has a time constant of 95 seconds, providing an opportunity for
                              processing by HR58. However, our model shows that the timescale of interest for predicting misrepair is much less
                              than this (Supplement 9) and therefore, we do not expect addition of HR to cause a notable deviation in cellular
                              behaviour from current predictions.
                                  We have implemented sub-diffusion in our model by a continuous time random walk method with no form
                              of tethering. This results in limited motion of DSB ends on the order of 100 nm at 24 hours, similar to that which
                              has been reported for live cell experiments28. This limited motion means that the size of the nucleus, on the order
                              of microns, does not affect the availability of potential partners. In V(D)J recombination the sub-diffusive motion
                              is better described by fractional Langevin motion (fLm)68. If fLm were to apply to DSB repair in general, broken
                              ends would be more strictly confined around their formation site. However, the confinement scale proposed
                              would allow for an exploration volume that is larger than the volume of interest for misrepair, which we show to
                              have a radius of around 70 nm (Fig. 2a). Therefore, we do not expect it to influence misrepair substantially.


SCiENTiFiC REPOrTS | (2018) 8:2654 | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-21111-8                                                                                8
www.nature.com/scientificreports/


                                  The scale of motion associated with DSB ends in vivo is a debated topic within the literature. The only assump-
                              tion made regarding this in our model is that the motion is sub-diffusive. The magnitude of the mobility of these
                              ends was then scaled in order to reproduce the endpoint of residual breaks reported in literature65. The final scale
                              of motion, and the fact that it agrees with the more conservative experimental results, is therefore an emergent
                              property. To achieve greater mobility whilst retaining agreement to the literature reported residual yields would
                              require a different mechanism. One possible mechanism that has previously been proposed, and observed exper-
                              imentally by some33, is the formation of repair centres. This directed motion could result in large displacements of
                              DSB ends whilst still maintaining their proximity, a necessary component for resolution of breaks.
                                  This work uses a detailed short segment of the chromatin fibre to determine break complexity. The model
                              includes damage from both direct and indirect effects in order to predict the DSB complexity. However, we do
                              not consider the impact of some chemical effects such as the oxygen fixation hypothesis69,70. Inclusion of these
                              processes would likely yield higher residuals at 24 hours due to a decrease in repair efficacy. Furthermore, our
                              process of converting damage sites into DSBs is a simplification that does not account for deletions of very short
                              DNA segments from complex breaks. If these segments are of insufficient length to recruit repair proteins71 they
                              are both irreparable and experimentally unmeasurable in fluorescent repair kinetics experiments72. We therefore
                              would expect to underestimate the true yield of residuals.
                                  We have discussed reasons that lead us to believe the mechanisms behind residual and misrepaired DSBs are
                              applicable to all NHEJ capable cells. This would result in conserved behaviour between cell types, but with cell
                              specific yields of residuals and misrepaired DSBs. We therefore propose that the general behaviour predicted by
                              our model from the interaction of these mechanisms is representative of reality.
                                  The components of the biological response, residual and misrepaired DSBs, are correlated to our results and
                              combined to give equations (4) and (6). These correlations show how the physical descriptors of the incident
                              beam that are relevant to biological response can be summed up using cluster density. The mechanisms we have
                              proposed for misrepair and residuals respond differently to LETt, Fig. 3, however both scale equally with dose.
                              This means that our model predicts no change in the ratio of cells undergoing misrepair for either hypo or hyper
                              fractionation. However, it also means that regardless of dose, misrepair will be dominant at LETt corresponding
                              to the dose fall-off region of the proton SOBP, >22 keV/µm, Fig. 3b. Assuming that misrepair is a marker for
                              chromosome aberration this potentially means areas of higher genomic instability are created at the distal edge of
                              the treatment volume. A second clinically relevant trend is predicted; using the 2 Gy case as an example, Fig. 3b,
                              a change in LETt from 20 keV/µm to 10 keV/µm reduces the average yield of misrepaired DSBs from 6.1 to 2.1,
                              whilst only decreasing the average yield of residual DSBs from 6.8 to 5.1. Treatment plans extend the prescribed
                              dose region beyond the gross tumour volume (GTV) partly in order to treat microscopic spread. In these regions,
                              and bordering areas, it would seem that induction of genomic instability could be limited by moving high LET
                              components into the tumour, whilst a similar cell kill potential could be achieved by maintaining dose.
                                  Predictions of our model can be derived from more conventionally scored parameters in proton therapy, equa-
                              tions (5) and (7). The predicted biological response, shown in Fig. 4, follows similar trends to the phenomenolog-
                              ical predictions of RBE across a proton SOBP9,73. In both cases there is a gradual increase in response across the
                              dose plateau with a pronounced peak at the distal edge. As such it lends weight to the concept that RBE is driven
                              by a combination of residual and misrepaired DBSs. Due to both residual and misrepaired DSB yields falling off at
                              a slower rate than physical dose, the model predicts considerable biological effect past the distal edge of the SOBP.
                              Misrepair falls off at a slower rate than residual DSBs, however the latter still dominates the yield. Therefore, we
                              suggest that the biologically extended range reported by Marshall et al.9, and others, is most likely due to the pres-
                              ence of residual DSBs. For the proton SOBP presented here, misrepaired DSBs are predicted to peak at a slightly
                              increased depth compared to residual DSBs, although the yields always remain lower. During dose escalation, this
                              peak will be the first region where misrepair starts to dominate the biological response. Since the misrepair peak
                              is deeper than the physical dose peak, this could have implications clinically.
                                  Methods of LET optimisation have been suggested for clinical use, with the justification that RBE is dependent
                              on LET73–75. The difference in response of residual and misrepaired DSBs to LETt further emphasises the benefits
                              of this type of planning, but suggests that prediction of biological outcome is not a straightforward combination
                              of dose and LET. Therefore, if the benefits of proton therapy are to be fully exploited, the mechanisms we have
                              proposed should be considered at the treatment planning stage. This could allow the manipulation of not only
                              RBE in general but also the dominant pathway taken to cell death; a difference which could possibly be exploited
                              clinically.

                              References
                               1. Curtis, S. B. Lethal and Potentially Lethal Lesions Induced by Radiation–A Unified Repair Model. Radiat. Res. 106, 252–270 (1986).
                               2. Cornforth, M. N. & Bedford, J. S. In Advances in radiation biology (eds Lett, J. T. & Sinclair, W. K.) 17, 423–496 (San Diego:
                                  Academic, 1993).
                               3. Kundrát, P. & Stewart, R. D. On the biophysical interpretation of lethal DNA lesions induced by ionising radiation. Radiat. Prot.
                                  Dosimetry 122, 169–172 (2006).
                               4. Joiner, M. Basic Clinical Radiobiology Edited by. 375, https://doi.org/10.1201/b13224 (2009).
                               5. Hall, E. J. & Giaccia, A. J. Radiobiology for the Radiologist. (Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2006).
                               6. Paganetti, H. Proton therapy physics. (CRC Press, 2011).
                               7. ICRU. ICRU report 78 - prescribing, recording, and reporting proton-beam therapy. J. ICRU 7 (2007).
                               8. Paganetti, H. Relative biological effectiveness (RBE) values for proton beam therapy. Variations as a function of biological endpoint,
                                  dose, and linear energy transfer. Phys. Med. Biol. 59, R419–72 (2014).
                               9. Marshall, T. I. et al. Investigating the implications of a variable RBE on proton dose fractionation across a clinical pencil beam
                                  scanned spread-out Bragg peak. Int. J. Radiat. Oncol. 95, 70–77 (2016).
                              10. Baiocco, G. et al. The origin of neutron biological effectiveness as a function of energy. Sci. Rep. 6, 34033 (2016).
                              11. Watanabe, R., Rahmanian, S. & Nikjoo, H. Spectrum of Radiation-Induced Clustered Non-DSB Damage - A Monte Carlo Track
                                  Structure Modeling and Calculations. Radiat. Res. 183, 525–40 (2015).


SCiENTiFiC REPOrTS | (2018) 8:2654 | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-21111-8                                                                                                   9
www.nature.com/scientificreports/


                              12. Rydberg, B., Cooper, B., Cooper, P. K., Holley, W. R. & Chatterjee, A. Dose-dependent misrejoining of radiation-induced DNA
                                  double-strand breaks in human fibroblasts: experimental and theoretical study for high- and low-LET radiation. Radiat. Res. 163,
                                  526–534 (2005).
                              13. Elsässer, T. et al. Quantification of the relative biological effectiveness for ion beam radiotherapy: Direct experimental comparison
                                  of proton and carbon ion beams and a novel approach for treatment planning. Int. J. Radiat. Oncol. Biol. Phys. 78, 1177–1183 (2010).
                              14. Friedrich, T., Scholz, U., Elsässer, T., Durante, M. & Scholz, M. Calculation of the biological effects of ion beams based on the
                                  microscopic spatial damage distribution pattern. Int. J. Radiat. Biol. 88, 103–107 (2012).
                              15. Ballarini, F. & Carante, M. P. Chromosome aberrations and cell death by ionizing radiation: Evolution of a biophysical model.
                                  Radiat. Phys. Chem. 128, 18–25 (2016).
                              16. Sachs, R. K. & Brenner, D. J. Effect of LET on Chromosomal Aberration Yields. I. Do Long-lived, Exchange-prone Double Strand
                                  Breaks Play a Role? Int. J. Radiat. Biol. 64, 677–688 (1993).
                              17. Schipler, A. & Iliakis, G. DNA double-strand-break complexity levels and their possible contributions to the probability for error-
                                  prone processing and repair pathway choice. Nucleic Acids Res. 41, 7589–7605 (2013).
                              18. Cornforth, M. N. Testing the Notion of the One-Hit Exchange. Radiat. Res. 121, 21–27 (1990).
                              19. Sachs, R. K., Chen, a. M. & Brenner, D. J. Review: proximity effects in the production of chromosome aberrations by ionizing
                                  radiation. Int. J. Radiat. Biol. 71, 1–19 (1997).
                              20. Roukos, V. et al. Spatial dynamics of chromosome translocations in living cells. Science (80-.). 341, 660–664 (2013).
                              21. McMahon, S. J., Schuemann, J., Paganetti, H. & Prise, K. M. Mechanistic Modelling of DNA Repair and Cellular Survival Following
                                  Radiation-Induced DNA Damage. Sci. Rep. 6, 33290 (2016).
                              22. McMahon, S. J., McNamara, A. L., Schuemann, J., Paganetti, H. & Prise, K. M. A general mechanistic model enables predictions of
                                  the biological effectiveness of different qualities of radiation. Sci. Rep. 7, 10790 (2017).
                              23. Holley, W. R., Mian, I. S., Park, S. J., Rydberg, B. & Chatterjee, A. A Model for Interphase Chromosomes and Evaluation of Radiation-
                                  Induced Aberrations. Radiat. Res. 158, 568–580 (2002).
                              24. Edwards, A. A., Moiseenko, V. V. & Nikjoo, H. On the mechanism of the formation of chromosomal aberrations by ionising
                                  radiation. Radiat. Environ. Biophys. 35, 25–30 (1996).
                              25. Chen, A. M., Lucas, J. N., Hill, F. S., Brenner, D. J. & Sachs, R. K. Proximity effects for chromosome aberrations measured by FISH.
                                  Int. J. Radiat. Biol. 69, 411–420 (1996).
                              26. Friedland, W., Jacob, P. & Kundrát, P. Stochastic simulation of DNA double-strand break repair by non-homologous end joining
                                  based on track structure calculations. Radiat. Res. 173, 677–688 (2010).
                              27. Friedland, W. & Kundrát, P. Track structure based modelling of chromosome aberrations after photon and alpha-particle irradiation.
                                  Mutat. Res. - Genet. Toxicol. Environ. Mutagen. 756, 213–223 (2013).
                              28. Soutoglou, E. et al. Positional stability of single double-strand breaks in mammalian cells. Nat. Cell Biol. 9, 675–82 (2007).
                              29. Girst, S. et al. Subdiffusion Supports Joining Of Correct Ends During Repair Of DNA Double-Strand Breaks. Sci. Rep. 3, 1–6 (2013).
                              30. Iarovaia, O. V. et al. Dynamics of double strand breaks and chromosomal translocations. Mol. Cancer 13, 249 (2014).
                              31. Aten, J. A. et al. Dynamics of DNA Double-Strand Breaks Revealed by Clustering of Damaged Chromosome Domains. Science (80-
                                  ). 303, 92 LP–95 (2004).
                              32. Jakob, B., Splinter, J., Durante, M. & Taucher-Scholz, G. Live cell microscopy analysis of radiation-induced DNA double-strand
                                  break motion. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 106, 3172–3177 (2009).
                              33. Neumaier, T. et al. Evidence for formation of DNA repair centers and dose-response nonlinearity in human cells. Proc. Natl. Acad.
                                  Sci. 109, 443–448 (2012).
                              34. Averbeck, N. B. et al. Efficient Rejoining of DNA Double-Strand Breaks despite Increased Cell-Killing Effectiveness following
                                  Spread-Out Bragg Peak Carbon-Ion Irradiation. Front. Oncol. 6, 1–8 (2016).
                              35. Belli, M. et al. Inactivation and mutation induction in V79 cells by low energy protons: re-evaluation of the results at the LNL facility.
                                  Int. J. Radiat. Biol. 63, 331–337 (1993).
                              36. Hill, M. A. Fishing for radiation quality: Chromosome aberrations and the role of radiation track structure. Radiat. Prot. Dosimetry
                                  166, 295–301 (2015).
                              37. Rabus, H. & Nettelbeck, H. Nanodosimetry: Bridging the gap to radiation biophysics. Radiat. Meas. 46, 1522–1528 (2011).
                              38. Agostinelli, S. et al. GEANT4 - A simulation toolkit. Nucl. Instruments Methods Phys. Res. Sect. A Accel. Spectrometers, Detect. Assoc.
                                  Equip. 506, 250–303 (2003).
                              39. Incerti, S. et al. Comparison of GEANT4 very low energy cross section models with experimental data in water. Med. Phys. 37,
                                  4692–4708 (2010).
                              40. Meylan, S. et al. Simulation of early DNA damage after the irradiation of a fibroblast cell nucleus using Geant4-DNA. Sci. Rep. 7,
                                  11923 (2017).
                              41. Bueno, M., Schulte, R., Meylan, S. & Villagrasa, C. Influence of the geometrical detail in the description of DNA and the scoring
                                  method of ionization clustering on nanodosimetric parameters of track structure: a Monte Carlo study using Geant4-DNA. Phys.
                                  Med. Biol. 60, 8583–8599 (2015).
                              42. Pater, P. et al. Proton and light ion RBE for the induction of direct DNA double strand breaks. Med. Phys. 43, 2131–2140 (2016).
                              43. Friedland, W., Dingfelder, M., Kundrát, P. & Jacob, P. Track structures, DNA targets and radiation effects in the biophysical Monte
                                  Carlo simulation code PARTRAC. Mutat. Res. - Fundam. Mol. Mech. Mutagen. 711, 28–40 (2011).
                              44. Rosenbluth, M. J., Lam, W. A. & Fletcher, D. A. Force microscopy of nonadherent cells: a comparison of leukemia cell deformability.
                                  Biophys. J. 90, 2994–3003 (2006).
                              45. Francis, Z., Villagrasa, C. & Clairand, I. Simulation of DNA damage clustering after proton irradiation using an adapted DBSCAN
                                  algorithm. Comput. Methods Programs Biomed. 101, 265–270 (2011).
                              46. Friedland, W., Jacob, P., Bernhardt, P., Paretzke, H. G. & Dingfelder, M. Simulation of DNA Damage after Proton Irradiation. Radiat.
                                  Res. 159, 401–410 (2003).
                              47. Nikjoo, H., O’Neill, P., Terrissol, M. & Goodhead, D. T. Quantitative modelling of DNA damage using Monte Carlo track structure
                                  method. Radiat. Environ. Biophys. 38, 31–38 (1999).
                              48. Nikjoo, H., Neill, P. O., Wilson, W. E. & Goodhead, D. T. Computational Approach for Determining the Spectrum of DNA Damage
                                  Induced by Ionizing Radiation. 583, 577–583 (2001).
                              49. Ester, M., Kriegel, H.-P., Sander, J. & Xu, X. A Density-based Algorithm for Discovering Clusters a Density-based Algorithm for
                                  Discovering Clusters in Large Spatial Databases with Noise. In Proceedings of the Second International Conference on Knowledge
                                  Discovery and Data Mining 226–231 (AAAI Press, 1996).
                              50. Drew, H. R. et al. Structure of a B-DNA dodecamer: conformation and dynamics. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 78, 2179–83 (1981).
                              51. Henthorn, N. T. et al. Nanodosimetric Simulation of Direct Ion-Induced DNA Damage Using Different Chromatin Geometry
                                  Models. Radiat. Res. 0, RR14755.1 (2017).
                              52. Bernal, M. a. & Liendo, J. a. An investigation on the capabilities of the PENELOPE MC code in nanodosimetry. Med. Phys. 36,
                                  620–625 (2009).
                              53. Finch, J. T. & Klug, a. Solenoidal model for superstructure in chromatin. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 73, 1897–1901 (1976).
                              54. Karamitros, M. et al. Diffusion-controlled reactions modeling in Geant4-DNA. J. Comput. Phys. 274, 841–882 (2014).
                              55. Metzler, R. & Klafter, J. The random walk’s guide to anomalous diffusion: a fractional dynamics approach. Phys. Rep. 339, 1–77
                                  (2000).


SCiENTiFiC REPOrTS | (2018) 8:2654 | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-21111-8                                                                                                     10
www.nature.com/scientificreports/


                              56. Yang, K., Guo, R. & Xu, D. Non-homologous end joining: advances and frontiers. Acta Biochim. Biophys. Sin. (Shanghai). 48,
                                  632–640 (2016).
                              57. Lee, K.-J. et al. Phosphorylation of Ku dictates DNA double-strand break (DSB) repair pathway choice in S phase. Nucleic Acids Res.
                                  44, 1732–1745 (2016).
                              58. Uematsu, N. et al. Autophosphorylation of DNA-PKCS regulates its dynamics at DNA double-strand breaks. J. Cell Biol. 177,
                                  219–229 (2007).
                              59. Graham, T. G. W., Walter, J. C. & Loparo, J. J. Two-Stage Synapsis of DNA Ends during Non-homologous End Joining. Mol. Cell 61,
                                  850–858 (2017).
                              60. Sun, J., Lee, K. J., Davis, A. J. & Chen, D. J. Human Ku70/80 protein blocks exonuclease 1-mediated DNA resection in the presence
                                  of human Mre11 or Mre11/Rad50 protein complex. J. Biol. Chem. 287, 4936–4945 (2012).
                              61. Walker, J. R., Corpina, R. A. & Goldberg, J. Structure of the Ku heterodimer bound to DNA and its implications for double-strand
                                  break repair. Nature 412, 607–14 (2001).
                              62. Dynan, W. S. & Yoo, S. Interaction of Ku protein and DNA-dependent protein kinase catalytic subunit with nucleic acids. Nucleic
                                  Acids Res. 26, 1551–1559 (1998).
                              63. Mimori, T., Hardin, J. A. & Steitz, J. A. Characterization of the DNA-binding protein antigen Ku recognized by autoantibodies from
                                  patients with rheumatic disorders. J. Biol. Chem. 261, 2274–2278 (1986).
                              64. Bernal, M. a. et al. The invariance of the total direct DNA strand break yield. Med. Phys. 38, 4147–4153 (2011).
                              65. Chaudhary, P. et al. Variations in the Processing of DNA Double-Strand Breaks Along 60-MeV Therapeutic Proton Beams. Int. J.
                                  Radiat. Oncol. Biol. Phys. 95, 86–94 (2016).
                              66. Li, Y., Reynolds, P., O’Neill, P. & Cucinotta, F. A. Modeling damage complexity-dependent non-homologous end-joining repair
                                  pathway. PLoS One 9 (2014).
                              67. Mao, Z., Bozzella, M., Seluanov, A. & Gorbunova, V. DNA repair by nonhomologous end joining and homologous recombination
                                  during cell cycle in human cells. Cell Cycle 7, 2902–2906 (2008).
                              68. Lucas, J. S., Zhang, Y., Dudko, O. K. & Murre, C. 3D trajectories adopted by coding and regulatory DNA elements: First-passage
                                  times for genomic interactions. Cell 158, 339–352 (2014).
                              69. Grimes, D. R. & Partridge, M. A mechanistic investigation of the oxygen fixation hypothesis and oxygen enhancement ratio. Biomed.
                                  Phys. Eng. Express 1, 1–22 (2016).
                              70. Ewing, D. The Oxygen Fixation Hypothesis: A Reevaluation. Am. J. Clin. Oncol. 21 (1998).
                              71. Lieber, M. R. The mechanism of double-strand DNA break repair by the nonhomologous DNA end-joining pathway. Annu. Rev.
                                  Biochem. 79, 181–211 (2010).
                              72. Friedland, W., Jacob, P. & Kundrat, P. Mechanistic Simulation of Radiation Damage To Dna and Its Repair: on the Track Tow Ards
                                  Systems. Radiat. Prot. Dosimetry 143, 542–548 (2011).
                              73. McNamara, A. L., Schuemann, J. & Paganetti, H. A phenomenological relative biological effectiveness (RBE) model for proton
                                  therapy based on all published in vitro cell survival data. Phys. Med. Biol. 60, 8399–8416 (2015).
                              74. Underwood, T. & Paganetti, H. Variable Proton Relative Biological Effectiveness: How Do We Move Forward? Int. J. Radiat. Oncol.
                                  Biol. Phys. 95, 56–58 (2016).
                              75. Grassberger, C., Trofimov, A., Lomax, A. & Paganetti, H. Variations in linear energy transfer within clinical proton therapy fields and
                                  the potential for biological treatment planning. Int. J. Radiat. Oncol. Biol. Phys. 80, 1559–1566 (2011).

                              Acknowledgements
                              N.T.H. and J.W.W. would like to acknowledge financial support from EPSRC (grant No.: EP/J500094/1). The
                              computational element of this research was achieved using the Condor High Throughput Computing facility at
                              the University of Manchester.

                              Author Contributions
                              N.T.H. developed the DNA damage model. J.W.W. developed the DNA repair model. N.T.H. and J.W.W. gathered
                              and analysed the data. M.S. developed the dose and LET depth code used in Fig. 4. N.T.H. and J.W.W. drafted the
                              manuscript based on discussions with M.S., R.I.M., K.J.K., N.F.K., and M.J.M. All authors reviewed and approved
                              the manuscript.

                              Additional Information
                              Supplementary information accompanies this paper at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-018-21111-8.
                              Competing Interests: The authors declare no competing interests.
                              Publisher's note: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
                              institutional affiliations.
                                            Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International
                                            License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or
                              format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Cre-
                              ative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this
                              article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the
                              material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not per-
                              mitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the
                              copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.

                              © The Author(s) 2018




SCiENTiFiC REPOrTS | (2018) 8:2654 | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-21111-8                                                                                                  11
