                                           Inplace Access to the Surface Code Y Basis
                                           Craig Gidney

                                           Google Quantum AI, Santa Barbara, California 93117, USA
                                           April 3, 2024



                                                      In this paper, I cut the cost of Y basis measurement and initialization in the surface
                                                  code by nearly an order of magnitude. Fusing twist defects diagonally across the surface
                                                  code patch reaches the Y basis in ⌊d/2⌋ + 2 rounds, without leaving the bounding box
                                                  of the patch and without reducing the code distance. I use Monte Carlo sampling to




arXiv:2302.07395v2 [quant-ph] 1 Apr 2024
                                                  benchmark the performance of the construction under circuit noise, and to analyze the
                                                  distribution of logical errors. Cheap inplace Y basis measurement reduces the cost of S
                                                  gates and magic state factories, and unlocks Pauli measurement tomography of surface
                                                  code qubits on space-limited hardware.



                                              The source code that was written, the exact noisy circuits that were sampled, and the statistics
                                           that were collected as part of this paper are available at doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.7487893 [Gid23].


                                           1 Introduction
                                           Because the surface code is a CSS code, its X and Z observables can be measured transversally. The
                                           Y observable can’t be measured transversally, and so must be reached by other means. The cost
                                           of Y basis measurement is surprisingly relevant to the overall cost of surface code computations
                                           because, in many magic state factory designs [FG18; GF19; Lit18], distilling a magic state involves
                                           hundreds of Y basis measurements. If running Shor’s algorithm costs a billion Toffoli gates [GE21;
                                           Hän+20] then, by implication, running Shor’s algorithm also costs hundreds of billions of Y basis
                                           measurements. The inefficiency of magic state factories magnifies the benefits of improving the
                                           cost of Y basis measurement.
                                               Over the past decade, the cost of Y basis measurement and initialization in the surface code
                                           has dropped dramatically (see Figure 1). Originally, the only known way to reach the Y basis was
                                           by distillation of the |i⟩ state [AGP05; Fow+12; FD12]. It was then realized that once an initial
                                           seed |i⟩ state was prepared, it could catalyze the production of more |i⟩ states [Fow+12; GF17].
                                           Later, it was shown that the S gate could be performed by braiding twist defects, allowing |i⟩ to
                                           be reached without distillation [Bro+17], with later realizations achieving a spacetime volume of
                                           2d × 2d × d [Bom+21; CC22]. This paper builds on these previous improvements and reduces the
                                           spacetime volume to d × d × 12 d, saving nearly another order of magnitude in the cost of reaching
                                           the Y basis.
                                               A notable technique for reaching the Y basis, not mentioned in the previous paragraph, is fold-
                                           ing the surface code patch [KYP15; Mou16]. In a folded surface code patch, Y basis measurement
                                           can be performed in constant depth. However, folding requires non-planar connectivity (or sub-
                                           stantial routing overhead). In this paper, I’m only interested in solutions with planar connectivity.
                                           The reason for this focus is because I’m part of a superconducting qubit group, and supercon-
                                           ducting qubit chips usually have planar connectivity [And+20; Zal+21; Zha+22]. That said, for
                                           completeness, I’ve included simulation results from folded surface codes in some figures.
                                               The paper proceeds as follows. In Section 2, I’ll explain the high level strategy and low level
                                           details behind my implementation of the Y basis measurement. In Section 3, I’ll describe and
                                           present statistics from various simulated experiments I performed, with the goal of understanding
                                           Craig Gidney: craig.gidney@gmail.com




                                                                                                 1
Figure 1: To-scale defect diagrams of historical methods for planar initialization of |i⟩ in the surface code,
showing the huge improvement over time. See Table 1 for a legend of defect types shown in the diagram.


the quantity and causes of logical errors in the Y basis measurement. In Section 4, I’ll summa-
rize the results and discuss ideas for future work. The paper also includes Appendix A, which
gives a summary of the surface code defects shown in diagrams, Appendix B, which defines the
superconducting-inspired noise model used in this paper, and Appendix C, which contains some
remarks on how I managed the complexity of creating these circuits.


2 Circuit Construction
Surface code computation is topological in nature. Constructions can be deformed without chang-
ing their function, because their function is defined by topological invariants such as whether two
“spacetime defects” are connected. (A spacetime defect is an exception to the normal background
pattern of surface code. See Appendix A for definitions of the various spacetime defects.) Thus,
the first step to creating a surface code construction is to understand its topology.
    One way to find a topological implementation of an operation is to decompose it into operations
whose topology you already know, connect them together, and deform the combined object to
simplify it. Recall that a surface code patch has four twist defects, one at each corner [Bro+17].
The Y basis measurement can be decomposed into an S gate followed by an X basis measurement.
The S gate’s topology is to exchange the two twists at the ends of an X type boundary of the
surface code patch [Bro+17]. The X basis measurement’s topology is to pair twists that share a
Z type boundary, and join their ends together forming a single curve. The topological result of
composing these two operations also joins two twist defects, but it joins the twist defects across the
diagonals of the patch. Thus, the topology of the Y basis measurement is to join twists diagonally
(see Figure 2 and Figure 3).
    In previous work, measuring a surface code qubit in the Y basis required increasing the size
of the patch, in order to move twists without letting them get too close to each other [Bro+17;
Bom+21; CC22]. My goal for this paper was to move the twists without resizing the patch. This
requires the twists to travel diagonally across the patch, without compromising the code distance
of the circuit.
    The first circuit I found for moving a twist diagonally is summarized in Figure 4. However,
although that circuit is simple, it isn’t efficient. It forces the surface code cycle to wait, while the
data qubits are moved using two layers of swap gates. It would be far better to somehow merge



                                                      2
the motion into the surface code cycle, to reduce the amount of extra noise incurred during the
transition.
    The best circuit that I found for moving a twist diagonally is summarized in Figure 5, and
shown exactly in Figure 7. The intuition behind this circuit is based on understanding how
topological defects can be arranged and implemented (see Appendix A). I knew twist defects
must appear wherever domain wall defects end in the bulk, and I knew a domain wall defect could
be implemented by using a walking surface code [MBG23]. Therefore I tried to produce a twist
defect along the diagonal by running a normal surface code cycle in the bottom left of the patch
while running a walking surface code cycle in the top right.
    As noted in Table 1, what makes a domain wall a domain wall is that it maps X into Z and
Z into X. Hadamard gates exchange the X and Z basis, and so you might expect that transver-
sal Hadamard gates are sufficient to implement a domain wall defect. However, although the
Hadamard-transformed stabilizers have undergone the right basis transition for a domain wall,
they end up in the wrong location. Just applying Hadamards produces stabilizers that don’t
match the surrounding checkerboard pattern of X and Z stabilizers. Correcting this requires mov-
ing the stabilizers over by a little bit. This can be done by using a walking surface code, and this is
why I say the walking surface code cycle implements a domain wall defect. The exact walking sur-
face code cycle that I used ended up differing from the one presented in [MBG23]. My cycle moves
the surface code faster, but doesn’t exchange the roles of the data qubits and the measurement
qubits.
    There were three main difficulties in getting the circuit details exactly right: finding opera-
tions that meshed the normal and walking surface codes at the seam along the diagonal, finding
operations that held the boundaries in place as the walking surface code pulled stabilizers inward,
and not losing code distance anywhere while doing these things. I had no clever methodology for
finding a satisfying circuit; I wrote a tool to make it easy to experiment and then experimented
until I had a solution (see Appendix C). In fact, when I initially started writing this paper, my
best construction required two surface code cycles (instead of one) and reduced the code distance
from d to d − 1. I later found the circuit I’m presenting, which manages to merge all necessary
qubit movement into a single working surface code cycle, while using only one additional layer of
entangling gates, and while preserving the full code distance. (I hoped there was even a way to
avoid the additional layer of entangling gates, but I haven’t been able to find one.)
    Locally, the reason the circuit in Figure 7 works is because it is measuring all the stabilizers
of the input surface code configuration and preparing all the stabilizers of the output surface code
configuration. Globally, the reason this circuit works is because it changes the boundary types
around the surface code patch from XZXZ to XXZZ. These local and global changes have the
combined effect of fault tolerantly mapping the Y observable to a known product of stabilizers. A
patch with XXZZ boundaries isn’t capable of storing a logical qubit. Instead, this patch has the
property that, by multiplying all of the X basis stabilizers together, you can derive the value of
a degenerate X observable running along the Z boundary. This product of stabilizers is what the
Y observable is mapped to. By repeatedly measuring the stabilizers of the patch, you learn this
product to arbitrarily high certainty [Gid22]. As will be shown in the next section, it’s sufficient to
measure these stabilizers d/2 times. The measurement process is finished by destroying the patch
by measuring all of its data qubits. To maximize code distance, each data qubit is measured in
the basis of its closest boundary.
    I verified the correctness of my construction in a variety of ways. First, locally, the key transition
round is supposed to turn the Y observable into a product of measured stabilizers. The code I wrote
declares that this transformation is supposed to occur during this part of the circuit, and locally
verifies it using the same method that’s used to verify other stabilizer flows. Second, globally, a
Y basis measurement should have the property that it correctly measures the value produced by
a Y basis initialization. It’s tempting to simply time reverse the Y basis measurement to produce
a corresponding initialization, but this wouldn’t detect mistakes such as accidentally measuring X
instead of Y, so when verifying I used simple noiseless direct preparation of the observable and all
stabilizers. I also verified against a magic state injection circuit set to inject the |i⟩ state. Third, if
the construction is working, it’s supposed to have a code distance of d. I checked the code distance
using stim’s graphlike distance search and more general heuristic search. The shortest logical error
found, within a d×d patch under circuit noise, uses d physical error mechanisms. The construction


                                                    3
achieves the full code distance of the patch.
    It’s notable that the timelike Y error mechanism shown in Figure 6 has distance d, despite
being caused by errors spanning across d/2 rounds and not spanning across space. This is because
the relevant error mechanism requires a chain of X errors and a chain of Z errors crossing the
d/2 rounds. Although there are error mechanisms that grow X and Z error chains together across
space (e.g. Y basis data errors), there is apparently no corresponding mechanism that does this
across time. A consequence of this asymmetry between space and time is that, unlike most surface
code constructions, the Y basis measurement has a preferred spacetime orientation. Normally,
performing a spacetime rotation of a defect diagram produces a different implementation of the
same operation, with the same code distance. The Y basis measurement is different: a spacetime
rotation of its defect diagram will turn the timelike Y error mechanism into a spacelike Y error
mechanism that has half the distance. Avoiding this problem is why Figure 9 has two cases, one
for spacelike motion and one for timelike motion. It’s conceivable that someone could fix this
asymmetry by finding an implementation of the surface code cycle where the relevant spacelike Y
error mechanisms had full distance, but I currently know of no way to do this.




Figure 2: Deriving that the Y basis measurement joins twist defects diagonally, by decomposing MY into S
followed by MX . See Table 1 for a summary of the types of defects appearing in this diagram.




Figure 3: Exploded defect diagram of an inplace Y basis measurement. See Table 1 for a summary of the types
of defects appearing in this diagram.


                                                    4
Figure 4: An example of moving a twist diagonally through the bulk of the surface code. Boundaries not
included. Simpler than the actual construction used by this paper (see Figure 5 and Figure 7). The black circles
connected to gray triangles are controlled-Y operations. The small yellow squares are Hadamard operations.
The red shapes are X stabilizers. The blue shapes are Z stabilizers. Click here to open a circuit with this
transition in crumble.




Figure 5: Stabilizer flow during the key cycle of Y basis measurement. Red shapes are X stabilizers. Blue shapes
are Z stabilizers. In the top right region X stabilizers take one step down while Z stabilizers take one step left.
Transversal Hadamards turn the shifted X stabilizers into Z stabilizers, and vice versa. At the boundaries, new
stabilizers are introduced to replace the ones that moved inward. At the center diagonal, the X stabilizers
stepping down merge into the Z stabilizers sitting along the diagonal.




                                                        5
Figure 6: Logical error mechanisms that prevent the construction from getting smaller, shown as small bright
cylinders traveling between darkened defects. “Input errors” are errors that occur while the patch is a normal
logical qubit patch, before the switch to a degenerate patch. “Spacelike Y errors” are error chains traveling
from a corner twist to the crossing twist during the transition round. “Timelike Y errors” are error chains
traveling from the twist defect in the transition round to defects in the final round. “Timelike XZ errors”
are error chains traveling from the X and Z boundaries in the transition round to defects in the final round,
that become topologically non-trivial due to traveling around the twist defect. “Switch-assisted errors” are
error chains traveling from one boundary to another during the transition round. The timelike errors are what
determine how fast the logical Y basis measurement can be performed, and also the best basis for each data
qubit measurement. If a timelike error is a problem, it can be trivially mitigated by adding more padding
rounds. Error chains travelling during the transition round are more difficult to mitigate without resizing the
patch, requiring careful ordering of operations.




                                                      6
Figure 7: A detector slice diagram of the surface code cycle where the logical qubit’s Y observable is turned
into a product of stabilizers, while continuing to measure the stabilizers of the patch. This cycle is the core
driver of the logical Y basis measurement. Steps advance in reading order. The colored shapes shown behind
each step are stabilizers of the state after the operations from that step have executed, using the color-to-pauli
convention RGB=XYZ (red is X, green is Y, blue is Z). Crossed circles linked to gray triangles are X-controlled
Y gates which apply a Y gate to the target when the control qubit is in the |−⟩ state. This diagram shows the
circuit before compilation into CZ gates. See also Figure 8. Click here to open this circuit in crumble.




                                                        7
Figure 8: Observable slice diagram of the surface code cycle where the logical qubit’s Y observable is turned
into a product of stabilizers. Filled circles are terms of the observable after the operations from that step have
executed, using the color-to-pauli convention RGB=XYZ (red is X, green is Y, blue is Z). Unfilled circles are
terms of the observable from before the operations from that step were executed. In the first step, the terms
form a typical Y basis observable. In the second step, single qubit terms prepared by reset gates are added
into the observable. The observable is then deformed by Clifford operations until, in the last step, all its terms
disappear into measurements. Although the observable is now physically measured, more rounds of stabilizer
measurement are needed in order to correct errors to make the logical measurement fault tolerant. Click here
to open this circuit in crumble.




                                                        8
Figure 9: ZX calculus diagrams and defect diagrams of using fast Y basis measurement to perform an S gate
by gate teleportation [GC99]. In previous work, the S gate required 4d3 volume [Bom+21; CC22]. Here the
S gate uses 3d3 volume if applied to a stationary qubit, or 1.5d3 volume if applied while a qubit is being
moved. The dependence of the cost on the motion of the logical qubit is due to the diagonal-twist-movement
technique presented in this paper being specific to moving diagonally across space (as opposed to across time
or spacetime). See Table 1 for a summary of the types of defects appearing in this diagram. The windows cut
into the front faces of the defects are just to show the interior; they aren’t actually present in the construction.




                                                         9
3 Benchmarking
All circuits in this paper were simulated using the noise model defined in Appendix B. Decoding
was done using an internal correlated minimum weight perfect matching decoder written by Austin
Fowler. For each circuit, samples were taken until either a thousand logical errors had been seen
or a billion shots had been taken, whichever came first. All simulated circuits were variations on
memory experiments. The code, circuits, and statistics are available on Zenodo [Gid23].
    In a memory experiment, a known logical state is initialized, protected against noise for some
number of rounds, and then measured. The experiment succeeds if the measured state agrees with
the prepared state, after error correction. Access to a Y basis measurement (and, by time reversal,
a Y basis initialization), allows a Y basis memory experiment to be defined.
    The Y basis memory experiment can be used to experimentally determine the optimal number
of padding rounds to use for Y basis initialization and Y basis measurement. If not enough
padding rounds are used, timelike error mechanisms become dominant and limit the fidelity. But
the benefit of adding padding rounds saturates once these timelike error mechanisms have been
suppressed below the noise floor set by spacelike error mechanisms. Figure 10 presents the results
of simulations varying the number of padding rounds, showing that the benefit of adding padding
rounds saturates at around d/2 rounds of padding.
    An interesting property of the Y basis memory experiment is that preserving Y basis states (as
opposed to X or Z basis states) better approximates the task of preserving the highly entangled
states that would be present in a real quantum computation. Because X and Z type defects form
large 2D surfaces in spacetime, while Y type defects only form narrow 1D curves, there are more
paths that chains of X type errors and Z type errors can follow. Thus, logical errors in the surface
code are biased away from being Y type errors, making X and Z type errors the dominant logical
error mechanisms. Y basis states and highly entangled states are sensitive to both of these dominant
logical error mechanisms, while X and Z basis states are only sensitive to one. This difference is
especially clear when focusing on stabilizer dependence. Although an X basis memory experiment
measures both X type and Z type stabilizers, the logical value can be error corrected using only
the measurement results from the X type stabilizers. Similarly, a Z basis memory experiment can
be error corrected using only the measurement results from the Z type stabilizers. Protecting a
Y basis state, or a highly entangled state, requires both the X stabilizer measurements and the Z
stabilizer measurements. The Y basis memory experiment exercises the whole surface code, instead
of only half.
    Because the Y basis memory experiment is sensitive to both X and Z logical errors, I expected
Y basis memory experiments to have logical error rates roughly twice as high as X and Z memory
experiments. However, simulations showed that the logical error rate was actually an additional
1.5 to 2.5 times higher than this expectation (see Figure 12). I was surprised by this difference, so
I investigated where the additional error was coming from.
    Because of Figure 10, I knew timelike errors weren’t the source of the problem. If they were,
adding more padding would have fixed the issue. This left spacelike errors during the transition
round as the likely cause. I checked this by isolating the transition round using magically noise-
less time boundaries. (A magically noiseless time boundary performs perfect measurement of all
stabilizers and observables of the code, preventing all error chains from crossing.) As controls, I
also used magically noiseless time boundaries to isolate three rounds of idling in the X, Y, and Z
bases. The results are shown in Figure 13. They suggest that the transition round is the source of
the additional errors. (Also, they confirm Y basis idling is twice as hard as X or Z basis idling.)
    Figure 11 digs further into the source of the extra errors by highlighting the paths that logical
errors tend to follow during the transition round. It suggests that the problem is occurring along
the path of the crossing twist. This makes sense to me, because the detectors along that path
have the largest detecting regions (note where the biggest shapes are in Figure 7). This suggests
that reducing the size of those detecting regions could bring the logical error rate in line with
expectation. This is a place where there’s room for improvement in the circuit construction.
    The last experiment that I simulated is an interesting variant of the Y basis memory experiment.
In the normal Y basis memory experiment, which I’ll now start calling “the unlinked experiment"
to avoid ambiguity, the initialization and measurement use the same orientation for the crossing
twist. This produces a topology where the Y type defects form two unlinked rings in spacetime.


                                                 10
In the other variant, which I’ll call “the braiding experiment", the initialization and measurement
use opposite orientations, resulting in a topology where the Y type defects form linked rings (see
Figure 15).
    Figure 14 shows a key difference between the unlinked experiment and the braiding experiment.
In the unlinked experiment, it’s always beneficial to reduce the time spent between the initialization
and the measurement, whereas in the braiding experiment spending too few rounds idling increases
the error rate dramatically. This is because, in the unlinked experiment, the twist crossing the
patch during initialization is part of the same spacetime object as the twist crossing the patch
during measurement. An error chain traveling from an object to itself has no effect on the state of
the system (it is, effectively, a product of stabilizers). In the braiding experiment, the twist crossing
the patch during initialization is part of a different spacetime object than the twist crossing the
patch during measurement. It’s a logical error for error chains to travel between these two objects,
and if there are too few idling rounds separating the objects then this error mechanism begins to
dominate.
    The braiding experiment highlights a subtle caveat on my claim that it takes d/2 + O(1)
rounds to perform a Y basis measurement. There are situations where up to d/2 + O(1) additional
idling rounds are needed, before the measurement, in order to keep the crossing twist away from
other twists. This context-dependent-cost phenomenon isn’t unique to Y basis measurements.
For example, the spacetime volume of a CNOT operation is reported based on a specific starting
orientation of the involved qubits [Hor+12]. Other orientations require more volume. The sheer
variety of possible contexts, and in particular the complex interdependence between how qubits
are routed and oriented and operated upon, mean that describing the cost of a single operation
using a single number is unavoidably an approximation. Ultimately, there are situations where the
marginal cost of a Y basis measurement is in fact d/2 + O(1) rounds and, based on my anecdotal
experience assembling large surface code computations, I expect that these situations will be by
far the most common. Therefore, despite the inherent ambiguity, I think d/2 + O(1) rounds is the
most appropriate number to use to describe the time it takes to perform the Y basis measurement
presented in this paper.




                                                   11
Figure 10: Varying the number of padding rounds at various code distances in the Y basis memory experiment.
When the number of padding rounds is too small, the error rate is limited by timelike errors. As the number of
padding rounds is increased, the effect of timelike errors is exponentially suppressed until they become negligible
relative to spacelike error mechanisms. The benefits of adding padding rounds saturates at around d/2 padding
rounds. Color highlights show hypotheses with a likelihood within a factor of 1000 of the maximum likelihood
hypothesis, given the samples collected.




                                                        12
Figure 11: Heatmaps of decoding graph edges contributing to logical errors from the d = 7, p = 0.1% case of
Figure 13. Edges are highlighted relative to how often they appeared in logical errors (as a difference between the
simulated noise’s edges and the edges predicted by the decoder, keeping only the edges in connected components
that flip the logical observable). Boundary edges have had their hit count artificially halved, to compensate for
symptom degeneracy at the sides of the patch. Logical errors appear to be traveling along the twist during the
Y basis transition.



                                                        13
Figure 12: Comparing the Y basis memory experiment to X and Z basis memory experiments, at various
code distances and for two different physical noise strengths. When using the initialization and measurement
presented in this paper, the Y basis memory experiment improves with code distance roughly as quickly as the
X and Z basis memory experiments but has a starting logical error rate that is roughly five times higher. Using
the folded surface code to initialize and measure in the Y basis, using non-local connectivity, would improve the
logical error rate. Color highlights show hypotheses with a likelihood within a factor of 1000 of the maximum
likelihood hypothesis, given the samples collected.




                                                       14
Figure 13: Logical error rate during three rounds including a Y basis transition, versus three rounds of idling
in various bases, with magically noiseless time boundaries before and after the rounds. Color highlights show
hypotheses with a likelihood within a factor of 1000 of the maximum likelihood hypothesis, given the samples
collected.




                                                      15
Figure 14: Varying the number of rounds spent idling in the memory configuration in the two variations of the
Y basis memory experiment. At small numbers of idling rounds, a timelike error in the braiding experiment
between the initialization and the measurement is dominant, causing an exponential jump in logical errors as
idling rounds approaches zero. Color highlights show hypotheses with a likelihood within a factor of 1000 of
the maximum likelihood hypothesis, given the samples collected.




                                                     16
Figure 15: Defect diagrams summarizing experiments simulated in this paper. See Table 1 for a summary of
the types of defects appearing in this diagram.




Figure 16: Flipping the orientation of the Y measurement, relative to the Y basis initialization, produces a
topologically distinct surface code experiment. In spacetime, the two twist defects end up either unlinked (the
“Y basis memory experiment”) or linked (the “twist braiding experiment”). A series of X and Z measurement
errors at the center of the patch, spanning from the preparation transition round to the measurement transition
round, creates a logical error in the twist braiding experiment but is topologically vacuous in the Y memory
experiment.




                                                      17
4 Conclusion
In this paper, I presented a way to perform Y basis measurement and Y basis initialization in
d/2 + O(1) rounds, without leaving the bounding box of the surface code patch and while achieving
full code distance. The spacetime volume of this construction is nearly an order of magnitude lower
than achieved in previous work. I benchmarked the performance of this construction, and found
that in short memory experiments it produces logical error rates slightly higher than would be
expected given the performance of X and Z basis memory experiments, but good enough for
practical use.
    Having a faster Y basis measurement allows other computational primitives to be improved. For
example, Figure 9 has concept diagrams for performing S gates by gate teleportation using the new
Y basis measurement. These S gates use less spacetime volume than previous work. Faster Y basis
measurement is also useful in the construction of magic state factories. For example, the magic state
factories in [FG18; GF19] end with a layer of potential Y basis measurements. These measurements
can now be performed faster than previously thought, increasing the expected execution speeds of
those factories by around 10%.
    The fact that the Y basis measurement can be performed inplace unlocks the ability to do
tomography on hardware only large enough to store a single logical qubit. For example, suppose
you’re interested in experimentally validating the fidelity of |T ⟩ state injection. If only X and Z
basis measurement are available, it’s impossible to distinguish between |T ⟩ and |T † ⟩, or between
|T ⟩ and a partially dephased |+⟩ state, because all these states have the same projection onto the
XZ plane of the Bloch sphere. Adding the ability to do Y basis measurement makes these states
distinguishable.
    Looking beyond the Y basis, I’m hopeful there are other uses for the ability to move a twist
diagonally across a surface code patch. More generally, I look forward to the discovery of more
ways to lay defects across space and time, in ever more complex computational dances.


5 Acknowledgements
I thank Ben Brown and Cody Jones for discussions about S gates and |i⟩ states that inspired
the ideas that eventually turned into the Y basis measurement presented in this paper. I thank
Matt McEwen for extensive discussions on the construction, and for encouragement to continue
improving upon earlier versions of the circuit. I thank Austin Fowler for writing the correlated
minimum weight perfect matching decoder used by this paper. I thank Austin Fowler, Alexis
Morvan, Mike Newman, and Kevin Satzinger for giving feedback that improved the paper. I thank
Hartmut Neven for creating an environment where this research was possible.


References
[AGP05]     Panos Aliferis, Daniel Gottesman, and John Preskill. “Quantum accuracy threshold
            for concatenated distance-3 codes”. In: arXiv preprint quant-ph/0504218 (2005). doi:
            10.48550/arXiv.quant-ph/0504218.
[And+20]    Christian Kraglund Andersen, Ants Remm, Stefania Lazar, Sebastian Krinner, Nathan
            Lacroix, Graham J. Norris, Mihai Gabureac, Christopher Eichler, and Andreas Wall-
            raff. “Repeated quantum error detection in a surface code”. In: Nature Physics 16.8
            (June 2020), pp. 875–880. doi: 10.1038/s41567-020-0920-y. url: https://doi.org/
            10.1038/s41567-020-0920-y.
[Bom+21]    Hector Bombin, Chris Dawson, Ryan V Mishmash, Naomi Nickerson, Fernando Pastawski,
            and Sam Roberts. “Logical blocks for fault-tolerant topological quantum computa-
            tion”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.12160 (2021). doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2112.12160.
[Bro+17]    Benjamin J Brown, Katharina Laubscher, Markus S Kesselring, and James R Wootton.
            “Poking holes and cutting corners to achieve Clifford gates with the surface code”. In:
            Physical Review X 7.2 (2017), p. 021029. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevX.7.021029.



                                                 18
[CC22]     Christopher Chamberland and Earl T Campbell. “Universal quantum computing with
           twist-free and temporally encoded lattice surgery”. In: PRX Quantum 3.1 (2022),
           p. 010331. doi: 10.1103/PRXQuantum.3.010331.
[FD12]     Austin G Fowler and Simon J Devitt. “A bridge to lower overhead quantum compu-
           tation”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1209.0510 (2012). doi: 10.48550/arXiv.1209.0510.
[FG18]     Austin G Fowler and Craig Gidney. “Low overhead quantum computation using lattice
           surgery”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1808.06709 (2018). doi: 10.48550/arXiv.1808.06709.
[Fow+12]   A. G. Fowler, M. Mariantoni, J. M. Martinis, and A. N. Cleland. “Surface codes:
           Towards practical large-scale quantum computation”. In: Phys. Rev. A 86 (2012).
           arXiv:1208.0928, p. 032324. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevA.86.032324.
[GC99]     Daniel Gottesman and Isaac L Chuang. “Demonstrating the viability of universal
           quantum computation using teleportation and single-qubit operations”. In: Nature
           402.6760 (1999), p. 390. doi: 10.1038/46503.
[GE21]     Craig Gidney and Martin Ekerå. “How to factor 2048 bit RSA integers in 8 hours
           using 20 million noisy qubits”. In: Quantum 5 (2021), p. 433. doi: 10.22331/q-2021-
           04-15-433.
[GF17]     Craig Gidney and Austin Fowler. “A slightly smaller surface code S gate”. In: arXiv
           preprint arXiv:1708.00054 (2017). doi: 10.48550/arXiv.1708.00054.
[GF19]     Craig Gidney and Austin G Fowler. “Efficient magic state factories with a catalyzed
           CCZ to 2T transformation”. In: Quantum 3 (2019), p. 135. doi: 10.22331/q-2019-04-
           30-135.
[Gid+21]   Craig Gidney, Michael Newman, Austin Fowler, and Michael Broughton. “A fault-
           tolerant honeycomb memory”. In: Quantum 5 (2021), p. 605. doi: 10.22331/q-2021-
           12-20-605.
[Gid21]    Craig Gidney. “Stim: a fast stabilizer circuit simulator”. In: Quantum 5 (July 2021),
           p. 497. issn: 2521-327X. doi: 10.22331/q-2021-07-06-497.
[Gid22]    Craig Gidney. “Stability Experiments: The Overlooked Dual of Memory Experiments”.
           In: Quantum 6 (Aug. 2022), p. 786. doi: 10.22331/q-2022-08-24-786. url: https :
           //doi.org/10.22331/q-2022-08-24-786.
[Gid23]    Craig Gidney. “Data for "Inplace Access to the Surface Code Y Basis"”. In: Zenodo
           (Jan. 2023). doi: 10.5281/zenodo.7487893.
[Hän+20]   Thomas Häner, Samuel Jaques, Michael Naehrig, Martin Roetteler, and Mathias Soeken.
           “Improved quantum circuits for elliptic curve discrete logarithms”. In: Post-Quantum
           Cryptography: 11th International Conference, PQCrypto 2020, Paris, France, April
           15–17, 2020, Proceedings. Vol. 12100. Springer Nature. 2020, p. 425. doi: 10.1007/978-
           3-030-44223-1_23.
[Hor+12]   Clare Horsman, Austin G Fowler, Simon Devitt, and Rodney Van Meter. “Surface
           code quantum computing by lattice surgery”. In: New Journal of Physics 14.12 (2012),
           p. 123011. doi: 10.1088/1367-2630/14/12/123011.
[KYP15]    Aleksander Kubica, Beni Yoshida, and Fernando Pastawski. “Unfolding the color
           code”. In: New Journal of Physics 17.8 (Aug. 2015), p. 083026. issn: 1367-2630.
           doi: 10.1088/1367-2630/17/8/083026. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1088/1367-
           2630/17/8/083026.
[Lit18]    Daniel Litinski. “A game of surface codes: Large-scale quantum computing with lattice
           surgery”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1808.02892 (2018).
[MBG23]    Matt McEwen, Dave Bacon, and Craig Gidney. “Relaxing Hardware Requirements for
           Surface Code Circuits using Time-dynamics”. In: (2023). doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2302.02192.
           url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2302.02192.
[Mou16]    Jonathan E Moussa. “Transversal Clifford gates on folded surface codes”. In: Physical
           Review A 94.4 (2016), p. 042316. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevA.94.042316.


                                              19
[Vic13]        Brett Victor. Media for Thinking the Unthinkable. [Online; accessed 12-Dec-2022].
               2013. url: http://worrydream.com/#!/MediaForThinkingTheUnthinkable.
[Zal+21]       Adam Jozef Zalcman, Alan Derk, Alan Ho, Alex Opremcak, Alexander Korotkov,
               Alexandre Bourassa, Andre Gregory Petukhov, Andreas Bengtsson, Andrew Dunsworth,
               Anthony Megrant, Austin Fowler, Bálint Pató, Benjamin Chiaro, Benjamin Villalonga,
               Brian Burkett, Brooks Riley Foxen, Catherine Erickson, Charles Neill, Chris Quin-
               tana, Cody Jones, Craig Michael Gidney, Daniel Eppens, Daniel Sank, Dave Land-
               huis, David A Buell, Doug Strain, Dvir Kafri, Edward Farhi, Eric Ostby, Erik Lucero,
               Evan Jeffrey, Fedor Kostritsa, Frank Carlton Arute, Hartmut Neven, Igor Aleiner,
               Jamie Yao, Jarrod Ryan McClean, Jeremy Patterson Hilton, Jimmy Chen, Jonathan
               Arthur Gross, Joseph Bardin, Josh Mutus, Juan Atalaya, Julian Kelly, Kevin Miao,
               Kevin Satzinger, Kostyantyn Kechedzhi, Kunal Arya, Marco Szalay, Marissa Giustina,
               Masoud Mohseni, Matt McEwen, Matt Trevithick, Matthew Neeley, Matthew P Harri-
               gan, Michael Broughton, Michael Newman, Murphy Yuezhen Niu, Nicholas Bushnell,
               Nicholas Redd, Nicholas Rubin, Ofer Naaman, Orion Martin, Paul Victor Klimov,
               Pavel Laptev, Pedram Roushan, Ping Yeh, Rami Barends, Roberto Collins, Ryan Bab-
               bush, Sabrina Hong, Sean Demura, Sean Harrington, Seon Kim, Sergei Isakov, Sergio
               Boixo, Ted White, Thomas E O’Brien, Trent Huang, Trevor Mccourt, Vadim Smelyan-
               skiy, Vladimir Shvarts, William Courtney, Wojtek Mruczkiewicz, Xiao Mi, Yu Chen,
               and Zhang Jiang. “Exponential suppression of bit or phase flip errors with repetitive
               quantum error correction”. In: Nature (2021). doi: 10.1038/s41586-021-03588-y.
[Zha+22]       Youwei Zhao, Yangsen Ye, He-Liang Huang, Yiming Zhang, Dachao Wu, Huijie Guan,
               Qingling Zhu, Zuolin Wei, Tan He, Sirui Cao, Fusheng Chen, Tung-Hsun Chung,
               Hui Deng, Daojin Fan, Ming Gong, Cheng Guo, Shaojun Guo, Lianchen Han, Na Li,
               Shaowei Li, Yuan Li, Futian Liang, Jin Lin, Haoran Qian, Hao Rong, Hong Su, Lihua
               Sun, Shiyu Wang, Yulin Wu, Yu Xu, Chong Ying, Jiale Yu, Chen Zha, Kaili Zhang,
               Yong-Heng Huo, Chao-Yang Lu, Cheng-Zhi Peng, Xiaobo Zhu, and Jian-Wei Pan.
               “Realization of an Error-Correcting Surface Code with Superconducting Qubits”. In:
               Physical Review Letters 129.3 (July 2022). doi: 10.1103/physrevlett.129.030501. url:
               https://doi.org/10.1103/physrevlett.129.030501.


A Surface Code Defects
In quantum error correcting codes, a “detector” is a set of measurements that will produce the
same parity every time when a circuit is executed without noise. A “detection event” occurs when
the parity of a detector is wrong. Detection events in the surface code can be classified into two
types (X and Z), based on whether they are associated with an X type or Z type stabilizer changing
unexpectedly. In the bulk of a surface code circuit, all errors produce an even number of detection
events of each type. In other words, the bulk of the surface code “conserves X parity" and “conserves
Z parity". These two conservation properties are what define the bulk. Any circuit location where
Pauli errors conserve X detection event parity and conserve Z detection event parity is part of the
bulk, regardless of the specific implementation details of the circuit.
   Defects are circuit locations where X parity conservation and/or Z parity conservation is broken,
because errors can produce an odd number of X detection events and/or an odd number of Z
detection events. Important types of defects are summarized in Table 1. Locations in the circuit
where an odd number of X detection events can be produced by an error are “X type defects"

 Defect Type       Name       Shape                        Effect                                In Diagrams
      I            Bulk        3D          Conserves X and Z detection event parity             Empty Space
      X         X Boundary     2D                 Absorbs X detection events                      Red Walls
      Z         Z Boundary     2D                 Absorbs Z detection events                      Blue Walls
      H         Domain Wall    2D     Cross-links X ←
                                                    → Z detection events across the wall   Transparent Yellow Walls
      Y            Twist       1D          Absorbs adjacent X · Z detection events            Magenta Cylinders

                        Table 1: Summary of types of defects in surface code circuits.



                                                        20
or “X boundaries". Locations where an odd number of Z detection events can be produced by
an error are “Z type defects" or “Z boundaries". Locations where an error can produce one X
detection event paired with one Z detection event, breaking the individual X and Z parities but
not necessarily the combined X + Z parity, are “H type defects" or “Y type defects".
    The distinction between H type defects (“domain walls") and Y type defects (“twists") is whether
or not it’s possible to use the defect to attach a chain of X errors to a chain of Z errors arriving
from the same direction. An H type defect can’t be used for this, because the relevant errors always
place the relevant X/Z detection events on opposite sides of the wall, but a Y type defect can.
Note that, when a domain wall ends in the bulk, it always ends on a Y type defect. An X chain
passing near the end of a domain wall can attach to a Z chain at the same location by passing
through the domain wall to become Z type and then returning by passing around the end of the
wall.
    There are many different ways to implement defects. For example, in the unrotated surface code,
a spatial X boundary is implemented by three body stabilizers whereas, in the rotated surface code,
two body stabilizers are used. Another example: the bulk of the surface code can be implemented
on a square grid or on a hex grid [MBG23]. At a low level, the specific implementation used is
extremely important because it affects performance (e.g. it can change the threshold). At a high
level, the different implementations of defects are interchangeable. The computation performed by
a surface code circuit can be understood in terms of the layout and topology of its spacetime defects,
without knowing exactly how the defects are implemented. Thus, surface code computations can
be improved both macroscopically, by changing the arrangement of defects, and microscopically,
by changing the implementation of defects.


B Noise Model
All circuits in this paper were simulated using the superconducting-inspired noise model defined
in Table 3. In legends, this noise model is called “SI1000" (short for Superconducting Inspired
with 1000 nanosecond cycle). To provide a reference for comparisons to other error models or
to hardware, the detection event fraction of the model at various noise strengths is plotted in
Figure 17.




                                                 21
      Noise channel     Probability distribution of effects
                        1 − p → (report previous measurement correctly)
          MERR(p)
                          p → (report previous measurement incorrectly; flip its result)
                        1−p→I
          XERR(p)
                          p→X
                        1−p→I
           ZERR(p)
                          p→Z
                        1−p→I
                          p/3 → X
           DEP1(p)
                          p/3 → Y
                         p/3 → Z
                        1−p→I ⊗I             p/15 → I ⊗ X         p/15 → I ⊗ Y            p/15 → I ⊗ Z
                         p/15 → X ⊗ I        p/15 → X ⊗ X         p/15 → X ⊗ Y            p/15 → X ⊗ Z
           DEP2(p)
                         p/15 → Y ⊗ I        p/15 → Y ⊗ X         p/15 → Y ⊗ Y            p/15 → Y ⊗ Z
                         p/15 → Z ⊗ I        p/15 → Z ⊗ X         p/15 → Z ⊗ Y            p/15 → Z ⊗ Z

                       Table 2: Definitions of various noise channels. Used by Table 3.




                                                Ideal gate        Noisy gate
           (any single qubit unitary, including idling) U1        U1 ◦ DEP1(p/10)
                                                       CZ         CZ ◦ DEP2(p)
                                                       RZ         RZ ◦ XERR(2p)
                                                       MZ         MZ ◦ MERR(5p) ◦ DEP1(p)
                                    (Wait for MZ or RZ )          DEP1(2p)

Table 3: The superconducting-inspired noise model used by simulations in this paper. Same as “SI1000" from
[Gid+21]. The single parameter p sets the two qubit gate error rate, with other error rates being relative
to this rate. Measurements are noisiest while single qubit gates are least noisy. Qubits not being reset or
measured during layers containing measurements or resets incur additional depolarization on top of other error
mechanisms. Note A ◦ B = B · A means B is applied after A. Noise channels are defined in Table 2.




                                                     22
Figure 17: Detection event fraction of basic memory experiment circuits in the SI1000 noise model. The
detection event fraction is the probability of a detector producing a detection event, averaged over all detectors
in the circuit.




                                                       23
C Tactics for building complex QEC circuits
In the past, when I’ve built quantum error correction circuits, I’ve used a strategy based on writing
code to produce the desired circuit and then verifying that the final circuit was correct (e.g. by
using Stim [Gid21] to verify the circuit’s graphlike code distance is as expected). For the Y basis
circuits presented in this paper, that approach didn’t work. There were two major obstacles. First,
although I could see roughly what had to happen in the circuit, I found it very difficult to work
out exactly what the circuit should look like along the twist and at the boundaries of the patch.
Second, even once I knew what the circuit should look like, it was difficult to write correct code
for producing the circuit due to there being so many opportunities for easy-to-make mistakes like
off-by-one errors and sign errors. Because of the these two obstacles, I would often get stuck in
loops of fixing a problem by introducing a different problem.
     To make it easier to figure out what the circuit should look like, I wrote a stabilizer circuit
editor with interactive automatic Pauli product propagation (see Figure 18). This was helpful for
two reasons. First, tracking Pauli observables is a very common task when designing QEC circuits,
but it’s slow and error-prone to do by hand. Computer software can do it billions of times faster,
and more reliably. Second, manually editing the circuit is a much more direct form of interaction
than iterating on code for producing a circuit [Vic13]. This completely nullifies whole classes of
errors. For example, I make off-by-one errors when placing gates by math but I don’t make these
errors when placing gates by hand. The key circuit cycle in Figure 7 was built, end to end, in this
interactive editor before being translated into code.
     To overcome the fact that each piece of the circuit was hard to get right, I switched from an
integration testing paradigm to a unit testing paradigm. I focused on verifying that each individual
surface code cycle was correct before attempting to combine it with the other cycles. Each cycle was
still defined by a circuit, but now each cycle also had an accompanying list of required “stabilizer
                               m
flows". A stabilizer flow A −→ B has a desired starting stabilizer A, an expected ending stabilizer
B, and a set of measurements m to multiply into the stabilizer as it travels across the circuit.
For example, if a cycle was supposed to measure a stabilizer S using measurements m1 and m2 ,
                                                      m1 ,m2
then its list of stabilizer flows would contain S −−−−→ 1. This allows each piece of the circuit
to be independently verified because, given a circuit and a list of stabilizer flows, it’s possible to
mechanically check whether or not the circuit has all the flows. (Note from the future: I ported my
method for verifying flows into Stim. It can be used by calling stim.Circuit.has_all_flows.)
     As a result of using this approach to piece verification, I found myself undergoing an interesting
conceptual shift. I stopped thinking of surface code rounds as preserving stabilizers, and started
                                                                                     m
thinking of them as recreating stabilizers. Instead of specifying A → A and A −→ 1 (translating
                                                                                    m             m
to “A is preserved and A is measured"), I found it more useful to specify A −→ 1 and 1 −→ A
(translating to “A is measured and A is prepared"). The benefit of this approach is that, when
composing circuits, their flows can be matched together in order to form detectors. This turns
annotating detectors, which I previously found to be one of the most error prone integration
processes, into an automatic process.




                                                  24
Figure 18: Screenshot of “Crumble", a stabilizer circuit editor that allows Pauli products to be interactively
introduced and automatically propagated. Although Crumble is still in the prototyping stage, with core func-
tionality unfinished and a complete lack of user interface polish, it was crucial to my process of creating and
understanding the circuits described in this paper. A prototype version of Crumble can be accessed at al-
gassert.com/crumble. The circuits described in this paper can be loaded into Crumble by downloading the
circuit files from Zenodo [Gid23] and using Crumble’s Import/Export button to paste and load the contents of
a circuit into the editor.




                                                      25
