                                                                                                     www.nature.com/scientificreports




              OPEN              Mechanistic Modelling of DNA
                                Repair and Cellular Survival
                                Following Radiation-Induced DNA
      received: 27 April 2016
    accepted: 09 August 2016    Damage
Published: 14 September 2016
                                Stephen J. McMahon1,2, Jan Schuemann1, Harald Paganetti1 & Kevin M. Prise2

                                Characterising and predicting the effects of ionising radiation on cells remains challenging, with the
                                lack of robust models of the underlying mechanism of radiation responses providing a significant
                                limitation to the development of personalised radiotherapy. In this paper we present a mechanistic
                                model of cellular response to radiation that incorporates the kinetics of different DNA repair processes,
                                the spatial distribution of double strand breaks and the resulting probability and severity of misrepair.
                                This model enables predictions to be made of a range of key biological endpoints (DNA repair kinetics,
                                chromosome aberration and mutation formation, survival) across a range of cell types based on a set
                                of 11 mechanistic fitting parameters that are common across all cells. Applying this model to cellular
                                survival showed its capacity to stratify the radiosensitivity of cells based on aspects of their phenotype
                                and experimental conditions such as cell cycle phase and plating delay (correlation between modelled
                                and observed Mean Inactivation Doses R2 > 0.9). By explicitly incorporating underlying mechanistic
                                factors, this model can integrate knowledge from a wide range of biological studies to provide robust
                                predictions and may act as a foundation for future calculations of individualised radiosensitivity.


                                Following more than a century of investigations into the impact of ionizing radiation on biological systems, radi-
                                ation is one of the most well-studied genotoxic agents and a key cancer therapy. Much of our modern understand-
                                ing of genetics and cellular biology has been built, in part, on investigations of irradiated cells and tissues1.
                                However, despite this wealth of knowledge, most clinical radiotherapy is still based on the application of the
                                linear-quadratic model, defining survival, S, in terms of the dose D of radiation received and two empirical fitting
                                                                     2
                                parameters α and β: S = e−αD −βD . Whilst it is widely acknowledged that this is only an approximation of the
                                true behaviour of the system and considerable debate exists about its wider applicability2, this characterisation
                                represents a useful surrogate for tumour control and normal tissue complication and broadly captures the sensi-
                                tivity of tumours at a population level. As a result, the linear-quadratic model remains a mainstay of clinical
                                practice, for example in the calculation of biologically effective doses (BEDs) to compare the impact of different
                                fractionation schedules3.
                                    Population-level characterisations of radiosensitivity are necessarily limited, however, as highlighted by our
                                growing knowledge of cancer’s underlying genetic hetreogeneity4. This heterogeneity is reflected in the varied
                                radiation response of tumours–even among those arising in the same sites–as seen in in vitro experiments and
                                clinical response5. The integration of genetic heterogeneity to provide personalised radiotherapy dose prescrip-
                                tions could significantly improve treatment outcomes and offer a more rationally informed balance between
                                tumour control and normal tissue toxicity.
                                    This seems particularly attractive given that many of the genetic determinants of radiation response are well
                                understood–processes such as DNA repair and cell-cycle arrest have been extensively studied, both directly with
                                radiation as well as in the wider field of molecular biology. However, the linear-quadratic model is poorly suited
                                to understanding these factors, as its empirical parameters are only indirectly linked to the mechanistic drivers of
                                radiation response, making it difficult to predict quantitatively the impact of a given mutation. This is particularly
                                true when multiple genes are mutated, as occurs commonly in cancer.

                                1
                                  Department of Radiation Oncology, Massachusetts General Hospital, 30 Fruit St, Boston, MA 02114, USA. 2Centre
                                for Cancer Research and Cell Biology, Queen’s University Belfast, Belfast, BT9 7AE, N. Ireland. Correspondence and
                                requests for materials should be addressed to S.J.M. (email: stephen.mcmahon@qub.ac.uk)


Scientific Reports | 6:33290 | DOI: 10.1038/srep33290                                                                                               1
www.nature.com/scientificreports/


                                  One approach to understand this heterogeneity is to use bioinformatics techniques to identify key genes or
                              signatures to stratify patients into different sensitivity groups6,7. While promising, these approaches typically do
                              not take advantage of our mechanistic understanding of radiation response, and so are often poorly conditioned
                              and require extremely large data sets to generate robust, translatable signatures.
                                  An alternative approach is to incorporate these factors into radiation response models. There has been con-
                              siderable interest in this area, including numerous analytic models which seek to more explicitly incorporate
                              underlying mechanisms (such as the Lethal-Potentially Lethal lesion or the Repair-Misrepair models8,9), and the
                              inclusion of additional parameters to reflect conditions such as dose rate (the Lea-Catcheside dose protraction
                              factor), oxygen availability (Oxygen Enhancement Ratio), radiation quality (Relative Biological Effectiveness)
                              and tissue geometry10–14. In addition, more detailed cell survival models have been developed which seek to more
                              explicitly incorporate these effects in their underlying model structure15,16. Alongside this, numerous models
                              have been developed of individual pathways such as DNA repair, chromosome aberration formation, apoptosis
                              or intercellular signalling17–20.
                                  However, these models are often limited to focus either on a single pathway or endpoint, and as such cannot
                              incorporate the broad spectrum of response data within the radiation biology literature. In this work, we develop
                              a model which implements high-level characterisations of DNA repair through different pathways, cell cycle
                              effects, and cell death processes to provide a mechanistically defined model of cellular responses to ionising
                              radiation. This model is based on a temporal and spatial model of DNA repair incorporating a Gaussian spatial
                              dependence of Double Strand Break (DSB) misrejoining and varying fidelities of different repair processes. Based
                              on this approach, the model is able to predict cellular responses for multiple endpoints for a range of experimental
                              conditions and cells of different genetic backgrounds, based on a single set of parameters common to all cell lines
                              rather than ad-hoc parameter sets for each cell line. This model provides a framework to incorporate mechanistic
                              genetic knowledge into radiosensitivity predictions and to support the development of personalised radiotherapy
                              models, and demonstrates an approach which may be applied to better understand other clinical techniques in
                              the future.

                              Methods
                              Model Overview.        This model initially focuses on DSB induction and repair following exposure to sparsely
                              ionising X-ray radiation. Because of the low Linear Energy Transfer (LET) of such radiation, resulting DSBs are
                              distributed randomly and uniformly throughout the nucleus. Developments to other radiation types may later
                              draw on nanodosimetric models to generate more accurate spatial DSB distributions21.
                                  Repair of these DSBs is modelled in a temporal fashion, taking into account the three key repair processes
                              within cells–Nonhomologous End Joining (NHEJ), Homologous Recombination (HR), and Backup or
                              Microhomology Mediated End Joining (MMEJ). As each break is repaired, it can either be repaired correctly
                              (where the two free ends of a DSB rejoin correctly), or misrejoined, when ends from two distinct DSBs are com-
                              bined, leading to genetic alterations which can have physiological impacts on the cell. The rate of rejoining
                                                                                                                       −d 2
                              between any two free ends is taken to scale with the distance between them as ζ (d ) ∝ e 2σ 2 where ζ is the rejoin-
                              ing rate, d is the separation between ends, and σ is a characteristic rejoining range. This rate applies to both
                              ‘correct’ ends (the pair created by a single DSB) as well as all mismatched pairs. Such an approach has been
                              adopted by other researchers in the past to describe spatial effects in radiotherapy18,22. By considering both the
                              total rate of rejoining and the spatial distribution of breaks, other factors can be calculated such as the rate of
                              inter- and intra-chromosome events and the size of resulting deletions. These rates can then be used to generate
                              predictions of various biological endpoints.
                                  While such a model can readily be implemented in a stochastic Monte Carlo fashion, this is often time-consuming,
                              particularly for rare endpoints, and so analytic solutions were derived for the rates of relevant processes. This
                              analytic model is summarised below, with additional details on its implementation and validation presented in
                              the Supplementary Information, along with a Python implementation.

                              DSB Induction and Repair Kinetics. X-ray induced DSBs have been extensively studied, with results sug-
                              gesting an initial yield of approximately 35 DSBs/Gy in human cells in the G1 phase of the cell cycle23. This value
                              scales linearly with the DNA content of the nucleus, e.g. across species or between different phases of the cell
                              cycle23. Assuming a human diploid cell contains 6.1 Gbp (Genome Reference Consortium, GRCh38.p6), this
                              gives a rate of 5.738 DSBs/Gy/Gbp, which is taken as a constant.
                                 These breaks are repaired by one of three processes. In normal cells, NHEJ can repair DSBs throughout the cell
                              cycle, and HR becomes available in late S and G2 phases for higher-fidelity repair of complex damage using the
                              replicated sister chromatid. Finally, in cells where NHEJ or HR is inhibited a fall-back process known as Backup
                              or Microhomology-Mediated End Joining (MMEJ) is used, although this pathway is significantly slower and more
                              error-prone24.
                                 We model the repair of breaks by each process with independent exponential kinetics with characteristic rates.
                              This gives rise to a three-phase behaviour for DNA repair, with breaks repaired either with fast kinetics (simple
                              breaks, via NHEJ), slow kinetics (complex DSBs, repaired via HR when available and NHEJ if not) and very slow
                              kinetics (breaks repaired via MMEJ due to HR or NHEJ failure). The overall behaviour is then:

                                                                N (t ) = N0 (pf e−λ f t + ps e−λ s t + pm e−λ m t )                           (1)
                              where N(t) is the total number of DSBs at time t, N0 is the initial number of DSBs, λx are the three repair rate
                              constants (Fast, Slow, and Microhomology, respectively), and px is the probability of a break being repaired by
                              each process.


Scientific Reports | 6:33290 | DOI: 10.1038/srep33290                                                                                           2
www.nature.com/scientificreports/


                                  Rather than directly fitting pf, ps and pm for each cell line, these probabilities are calculated on a mechanistic
                              basis based on two fitting parameters. Firstly, breaks are randomly selected to be either simple or complex based
                              on a probability pc. This parameter is related to the quality of the incident radiation, and is taken as a single fitting
                              parameter across all X-ray radiation types. Simple breaks are initially associated with fast repair kinetics, and
                              complex breaks with slow repair kinetics (that is, pf =​  (1 −​  pc), ps =​  pc and pm =​ 0 in repair-competent cells).
                                  Next, if a cell has a defect in the preferred repair pathway for a break, a portion of these breaks will fail to be
                              efficiently repaired with probability pfail and will instead be repaired by MMEJ. For example, if a cell in G2 has a
                              defect in NHEJ, the repair probabilities would become pf =​  (1 −​  pc)(1 −​  pfail), ps =​  pc and pm =​  (1 −​  pc)pfail. A full
                              tabulation of this approach is presented in the Supplementary Information.
                                  This approach gives a set of five fitting parameters (λf, λs, λm, pc, and pfail) which characterise the rates of repair
                              as a function of time in cells under a range of experimental conditions and genetic backgrounds.

                              DSB Repair Fidelity. While DSB repair is a high fidelity process, there remains a significant risk of misrepair
                              leading to mutations and genetic aberrations, which is known to be a spatially-dependent process18,22. By model-
                              ling the behaviour of breaks using the Gaussian rejoining probability outlined above, the fraction of misrepaired
                              breaks can be calculated as a function of the initial number of breaks, N0, and σ. For breaks distributed uniformly
                              within a spherical nucleus, it can be shown (see Supporting Information) that the probability of a DSB correctly
                              rejoining is given by

                                                                                             1 − e−η (N 0, R , σ )
                                                                               PCorrect =
                                                                                               η (N 0 , R , σ )                                             (2)
                              where η​is the effective integral misrejoining probability for a single randomly placed DSB within a nucleus of
                              radius R with rejoining range σ when there are initially N0 other DSBs present within the system. This rejoining
                              rate can be exactly calculated as:
                                                                                             6N 0
                                                                        η (N 0 , R , σ ) =          θ (R , σ ) ω (R , σ )
                                                                                             4π R 3                                                         (3)
                              where the first term is the density of free DSB ends within the nucleus, θ is the rejoining rate between two ran-
                              domly placed DSB ends, and ω is a correction coefficient to account for skew in the η distribution for very small
                              σ. These can be calculated as:

                                                              2πσ 2        3
                                                                                    R 2 
                                                                                    
                                                                                                  4R 2                                 
                                                                                           − e− 2σ 2 (σ 4 − R2σ 2) + (σ 4 − 3R2σ 2) 
                                               θ (R , σ ) =     3 
                                                                      2 π R  σ erf                                                   
                                                               R                   
                                                                                      σ                                                                (4)

                                                                                                                     Bσ
                                                                            ω (R , σ ) = A + (1 − A) e− R                                                   (5)
                              where A and B are geometric fitting parameters, with values 0.757 and 5.39 respectively, determined by matching
                              this function to the output of a Monte Carlo simulation of break rejoining, as illustrated in the Supplementary
                              Information.
                                  One additional factor in DNA repair is that different processes have different inherent fidelities, even in the
                              absence of misrejoining with other breaks. To reflect this, we associate a base fidelity with NHEJ and MMEJ, such
                              that the probability of correct repair is given by
                                                                                              1 − e−η (N 0, R , σ ) 
                                                                            PCorrect = µ x                        
                                                                                                                      
                                                                                              η (N 0, R , σ )                                          (6)
                              where μx is a process-specific fidelity. For homologous recombination, it is assumed that repair always completes
                              successfully, giving PCorrect =​  1.
                                 While this provides total misrejoining rates, the severity of these events is governed by the location of the
                              involved DNA ends, and can range from a short deletion to aberrant bridges between chromosomes. Quantifying
                              the rates of these different events is an important factor in modelling the effects of ionizing radiation on DNA25.

                              Chromosome Aberrations–G1.                   Chromosome aberrations are large-scale genomic rearrangements
                              between and within chromosomes leading to the deletion of DNA or the formation of aberrant chromosomes
                              (rings, dicentrics) that are unable to segregate properly during mitosis. These events can have a high probability
                              of lethality and are one of the most biologically significant effects of ionising radiation.
                                  Aberrations can be classified as inter- or intra- chromosome, depending on which chromosomes provided the
                              damaged free ends. As a highly simplified model of chromosome structure, chromosomes are modelled as spher-
                              ical sub-volumes with radius r c = R , where nc is the number of chromosomes within the nucleus. This
                                                                      3 nc
                              approach neglects variations in chromosome size, shape and packing that would be expected to impact the type
                              and distribution of aberrations. However, as this analysis focuses on average rates across the whole nucleus, the
                              impact of these factors is significantly reduced. When misrepair occurs, the probability of an intra-chromosome
                              event is given by the ratio of the rate of rejoining within the chromosome to that across the whole nucleus, given
                              by:



Scientific Reports | 6:33290 | DOI: 10.1038/srep33290                                                                                                         3
www.nature.com/scientificreports/



                                                                                                  θ (r c , σ )
                                                                                      Pintra =
                                                                                                  θ (R , σ )                                               (7)
                                  A second important classification is whether the exchange is symmetric or asymmetric. In a symmetric
                              exchange, all chromosomes contain exactly one centromere, while asymmetric exchanges form acentric frag-
                              ments, dicentrics and other complex rearrangements25. Symmetric exchanges are typically non-lethal, while
                              asymmetric events are often incompatible with cell survival.
                                  The symmetry of an exchange is solely determined by whether the DNA ends which rejoin are correctly
                              aligned (i.e. centromere-containing fragment to centromere-free fragment) or not. As the DNA ends are other-
                              wise identical, symmetric and asymmetric exchanges are taken to occur with equal frequency, that is Pasym =​  0.5.
                                  Based on these assumptions, the total number of misrepaired DSBs, and corresponding number of dicentrics
                              (asymmetric inter-chromosome) and deletions (asymmetric intra-chromosome) can be calculated as:
                                                                       N mis (t ) = (N 0 − N (t ))(1 − PCorrect )
                                                                       N dic      = 0.5N mis (1 − Pintra)
                                                                       N del      = 0.5N mis Pintra                                                        (8)
                              where Nmis(t) is the number of misrepaired DSBs at time t, and the factor 0.5 represents the probability of an
                              asymmetric exchange. Because of the time dependence of this term, formation of dicentrics and deletions is also
                              a time-dependent process, however for brevity this is excluded from subsequent expressions. For the purposes
                              of this analytic formulation, all acute exposures are considered as happening instantly, meaning all N0 DSBs are
                              created instantly before any repair. More complex patterns incorporating intra-exposure repair can potentially be
                              calculated using Monte Carlo techniques.
                                  For deletions, size is also an important factor. Based on the assumption that the separation of two breaks in
                              base pairs along the chromosome increases monotonically with spatial distance between the free ends, the size of
                                                               2Lr 3
                              a deletion in base pairs is D = 3D , where L is the total length of all chromosomes (in Gbp) and rD the separation
                                                                R
                              between ends forming the deletion.
                                  The rate of deletions smaller than D is given by the rate of misrejoining events over distances shorter than rD,
                              assuming both events occur within the same chromosome. This is given by
                                                                                                 θ (r c , σ , r D )
                                                                                   Pdel<D =
                                                                                                   θ (r c , σ )                                            (9)
                              where the generalised form of θ is:
                                                                                                                                              
                                                                    8 2π r 3σerf  rD 2                                                  
                                                                               c                                                           
                                                                                         
                                                                                            σ      
                                                                                                                                                
                                                             πσ 2                                                                               
                                            θ(rc , σ , rD) =                   2
                                                                                                                                                   
                                                             4rc3  − D2 4
                                                                              r
                                                                                                2 2         2            3       2 2        2     
                                                                       − e 2 σ   ( rD +   4 rD ( σ  − 3 rc  ) + 16 r r
                                                                                                                      D c  + 8 σ  ( σ − 3 rc 
                                                                                                                                             ))    
                                                                             4           2 2                                                      
                                                                        +(8σ − 24rc σ )                                                                (10)
                              As the visibility and lethality of lesions often requires them to be above a certain size, the number of deletions
                              larger than D can be expressed as:
                                                                        N del>D = 0.5N mis Pintra (1 − Pdel<D)                                            (11)


                              Mutation Rates. In addition to lethal aberrations, radiation can induce non-lethal mutations where genes are
                              deleted or altered, leading to changes in cellular function. Mutations are typically assayed on single genes whose
                              alteration has significant impacts on cell survival in a particular condition–such as the Hypoxanthine-guanine
                              phosphoribosyl-transferase (Hprt) gene26. These mutations are typically rare events, and are dependent on the
                              size of the gene under consideration.
                                  Misrepair events can cause mutation in two ways–either partial alterations (breaks within the gene misrejoining)
                              or total deletions (two breaks outside a gene misrepairing to create a deletion which spans the gene).
                                  The number of total deletions for a gene of length g can be calculated as:
                                                                                          1       0
                                                                        N mutTotal =
                                                                                         2L   ∫−b     max
                                                                                                            N del>(b +g ) db
                                                                                                                                                          (12)
                              where for each point at a distance b base pairs before the start of the gene, the probability of a deletion event
                              occurring which spans the whole gene in consideration is calculated, ranging from the start of the gene (b =​  0) to
                              bmax, the largest deletion which is compatible with cell survival. This is normalised according to the total length
                              of the genome, L.
                                  For intra-gene events, the rate can be calculated by assuming that all misrepair events involving a break within
                              the gene are taken to lead to mutations, given by:
                                                                                                               g
                                                                                   N mutPartial = N mis
                                                                                                               L                                          (13)


Scientific Reports | 6:33290 | DOI: 10.1038/srep33290                                                                                                       4
www.nature.com/scientificreports/


                               Parameter           Meaning                                 Value
                                                         DNA Model Parameters
                                              DNA Damage Yield                 5.738                   DSB/Gy/Gbp
                               λF            Fast Repair Coefficient         3.6 ±​  0.6                 hours−1
                               λS           Slow Repair Coefficient         0.15 ±​  0.02                hours−1
                               λM          MMEJ Repair Coefficient        0.0084 ±​  0.0015              hours−1
                               pc          Complex break probability        0.42 ±​  0.03
                               pf          Repair Failure Probability       0.67 ±​  0.09
                               σ                Misrejoin range           0.0428 ±​  0.0005                  Rnuc
                               μNHEJ             NHEJ Fidelity             0.985 ±​  0.002
                               μMMEJ            MMEJ Fidelity              0.465 ±​  0.05
                               ν              Point Mutation Rate          0.044 ±​  0.005
                                                       Survival Model Parameters
                               ψ               Mitosis Sensitivity         0.014 ±​  0.002               break−1
                               ϕ             Apoptosis Sensitivity        0.0085 ±​  0.001               break−1

                              Table 1. List of fitting parameters used in this work, and best fit parameter values from model.
                              DNA damage yield is taken as a fixed value from the literature, while other values are presented as best fit
                              parameters ±​ one standard deviation fitting uncertainty.


                              In addition to misrepair events, even joining of the correct DSB ends may lead to short point mutations in a gene
                              due to imperfect repair leading to small insertions or deletions. To reflect this, a point mutation factor, ν, is intro-
                              duced, with the number of point mutations given by:
                                                                                                                    g
                                                                            N mutPoint = ν (N − N mis )
                                                                                                                    L                            (14)

                              Chromosome Aberrations–G2. In G1, inter-arm exchanges (intra-chromosome events which span the
                              centromere) do not have increased visibility compared to other intra-chromosome events. However, in G2 these
                              events have a much higher visibility due to the structural changes involving the sister chromatid. The rate of
                              inter-arm aberrations can be estimated by considering the rate at which an aberration spans some or all of the
                              centromere, in a similar way to the deletion of a single gene, above. Thus the inter-arm aberration rate is similarly
                              given by:
                                                                                           N mis l c     0
                                                                        N interArm =
                                                                                             L         ∫−0.5l Pdel>bdb
                                                                                                               c                                 (15)
                              where the centromere is assumed to have negligible size (i.e. g =​ 0). The integral is carried out over the whole
                              average chromosome length lc, as chromosome aberration assays typically do not require the long-term survival
                              of the cell.

                              DNA Repair Model Implementation and Fitting.                       This model has been implemented in Python for a
                              general cell, based on two sets of input values. The first is the set of nine mechanistic fitting parameters-λF, λS, λM,
                              pc, pfail, σ, μNHEJ, μMMEJ and ν, which are the same across all cell lines. The second set are those specific to a given
                              experiment. These include details of the phenotype of the cells being investigated (its genome size and chromo-
                              some number, and any defects in DNA repair processes) and experiment-specific parameters (the dose delivered,
                              the phase the cells were in during irradiation, and the time after irradiation when the endpoint was measured).
                                  Cell-specific values (such as the initial number of DSBs and the proportions of repair by different processes,
                              pf, ps and pm) are then determined by combining these experimental and mechanistic parameters. From these,
                              observable endpoints such as residual DSBs, numbers of visible and lethal chromosome aberrations, and rates of
                              mutation can be calculated.
                                  To fit these model predictions, a number of data sets were obtained from the literature, including measure-
                              ments of DNA repair through γ​H2AX fluorescence27,28, DNA misrepair rates using PFGE29,30, chromosome aber-
                              ration yields18,31–37 and mutation rates38–40. Values were extracted from published tables or figures along with
                              associated uncertainties. To reflect uncertainties in data extraction and experimental methods, an additional 5%
                              random uncertainty was added to all points. A single simultaneous fit was carried out across all data varying the
                              9 fitting parameters. By simultaneously fitting to a wide range of endpoints, the model generates a robust, unique
                              parameter set, with reasonable uncertainties and small covariances. This fit was carried out in Python using the
                              SciPy curve_fit routine, using a weighted nonlinear least squares algorithm. The resulting best-fit parameters are
                              presented in Table 1, and these values were used to calculate all of the curves presented below. The model imple-
                              mentation, fitting algorithm, and input data sets are presented in the Supplementary Information, together with
                              the characteristics of cell lines analysed as part of this work.
                                  A number of additional endpoints (yields of sub-types of chromosome aberrations, low dose rate chromo-
                              some aberration yields and point mutation rates) were extracted, but not incorporated in the fit, to test underlying
                              model assumptions.


Scientific Reports | 6:33290 | DOI: 10.1038/srep33290                                                                                               5
www.nature.com/scientificreports/


                              Survival.      Cell survival is one of the key biological endpoints of radiation exposure. In the simplest case, the
                              response of non-cycling cells (e.g. those arrested in G1/G0) is driven by the formation of lethal chromosome
                              aberrations–that is, those which prevent chromosome segregation at mitosis (dicentrics, rings) or those which
                              disrupt cellular function through the loss of genetic material (large deletions). Such effects have been shown to
                              correlate well with Giemsa-stained aberration counts, which are sensitive to deletions greater than 3 Mbp in size41.
                                  For non-cycling cells G1 survival can thus be calculated as S = e−N dic−N del>3MBP (assuming Poisson-distributed
                              aberrations, a reasonable approximation for X-rays). For cells irradiated in G2, the replicated chromatids mean
                              that either both must see large deletions, or the aberration must be sufficient to prevent successful mitosis. As a
                              result, the survival rate is estimated as S = e−N dic−N interArm. This neglects the case where cells see multiple lethal
                              deletions across chromatids passed down to both daughter cells, but this is relatively rare at clinical doses.
                                  Two other effects are significant in cycling cells–mitotic death and radiation-induced arrest. Mitotic death is
                              triggered when cells undergo mitosis with unrepaired DSBs–either due to newly formed breaks42, or escaping the
                              G2 DNA damage checkpoint (which is known to occur when fewer than 20 DSBs remain43). The exact mecha-
                              nisms of mitotic death are not fully understood, but experimental evidence44 indicates that these cells die with
                              approximately exponential kinetics in dose, with similar rates across cell lines. Thus, the probability of surviving
                              mitosis is modelled as a single exponential, Smitosis = e−ϕ N m, where Nm is the number of DSBs present in mitosis
                              and ϕ is a rate constant shared across all cells.
                                  Radiation-induced arrests are complex processes, and are triggered by a range of factors. While they are
                              induced throughout the cell cycle in response to initial damage, they are typically transient once DNA repair is
                              completed. However, they have an important impact on in vitro survival in G1, where arrest can be followed by
                              long-term senescence or apoptosis. Quantification of the relative contribution of apoptosis and senescence to
                              survival remains challenging45, and even a partial model of these processes is outside the scope of this work.
                              Consequently, a highly simplified model of G1 arrest and apoptosis is considered here. Cells which are cycling
                              and have a functional G1 arrest have a probability of successfully escaping G1 of Sapop = e−ψ N G1, where NG1 is the
                              number of DSBs induced in G1 and ψ is again common across all cells. While simple, this is broadly in line with
                              observed kinetics of escape from G1 for irradiated cells46. For cells that are not sensitive to these processes (those
                              not cycling, in different phases, or with a mutation in a gene essential to this process such as p53) this event is not
                              triggered.
                                  As for the DNA repair model, survival data was extracted from the literature to validate the model for a range
                              of hamster and human cell lines, different cell cycle phases, different genetic backgrounds and experimental
                              conditions23,27,41,47–51. To characterise ϕ and ψ, a limited fit was carried out to these survival data, taking parame-
                              ters from the DNA model as fixed inputs to reduce the impact of the relatively low reproducibility of clonogenic
                              survival data.

                              Results
                              DNA Repair Kinetics. Measurements of DNA repair using γ​H2AX foci were obtained for mouse and human
                              cell lines with a range of repair defects, irradiated in G1 and G227,28. These papers were selected as they repre-
                              sent systematic studies of cell lines with similar origins (human or mouse fibroblasts) with known mutations in
                              individual genes in key DNA repair pathways. It is important to note that there is significant inter-laboratory
                              variability in γ​H2AX foci counts, even for nominally identical experiments. However, within a single site, relative
                              foci yields are consistent52. As a result, for each paper under consideration a single scaling factor was applied
                              across all reported foci counts, to account for variations in staining and counting procedures between groups by
                              normalising each set of results to the model’s predicted total yield of DSBs. These scaling factors were 1.70 and
                              1.02 for Kühne et al.27 and Beucher et al.28, respectively. In addition, observation times were offset by 7.5 minutes
                              to account for the known lag between DSB creation and foci appearance53.
                                  The model’s predictions for these cells are compared to experimental observations in Fig. 1, normalised to the
                              initial number of foci predicted at t = 0. It can be seen that at time-points ranging from 15 minutes to 300 hours,
                              the model agrees well with the overall rates of repair in different phases of the cell cycle for both human and
                              mouse cell lines. As these lines also represent different repair defects, this also enables the determination of
                              unique rate constants for each of the classes of DNA repair, the rate at which complex damage is formed, and the
                              probability of repair failure in DNA repair defective cells.
                                  While such a multi-exponential approach is well established in the analysis of DNA repair kinetics, by com-
                              bining it with the misrepair models it can provide key constraints on parameters (such as the rate of repair failure
                              in different mutant cell lines) which cannot be directly assessed from misrepair measurements alone. Thus, by
                              combining these different experimental data points, better links can be drawn between fundamental mechanisms.

                              Misrepair. Although almost all DSBs are repaired after long time periods, the fidelity of this repair is not guar-
                              anteed, and misrepair is one of the key drivers of radiation-induced cell killing. Pulsed Field Gel Electrophoresis
                              measurements of the correct rejoining of particular sections of DNA have been obtained to assess the overall rate
                              of misrepair in irradiated cells29,30 and converted to misrepair rates per DSB. These observations were compared
                              to the model’s predicted rates of misrejoining as a function of dose, as illustrated in Fig. 2, showing good agree-
                              ment at doses from 5 to 80 Gy, although the uncertainties on many measured points are considerable. This corre-
                              lation indicates that the overall misrepair model is reasonable, scales well at higher doses, and provides parameter
                              constraints for applications to clinically relevant endpoints at lower doses.

                              Chromosome Aberrations.          There are a number of different techniques to quantify chromosome aber-
                              rations, including techniques such as Giemsa staining of chromosomes at mitosis, or Fluorescence In Situ
                              Hybridisation (FISH) which can be used to stain specific chromosomes, or in the case of M-FISH54 to uniquely


Scientific Reports | 6:33290 | DOI: 10.1038/srep33290                                                                                               6
www.nature.com/scientificreports/




                              Figure 1. Comparison of modelled DNA repair curves (lines) and experimental data (points) for DNA
                              repair, derived from γH2AX foci measurements. Models were applied to human or mouse cell lines, either
                              with competent repair (solid line) or defective repair (NHEJ defective: dashed line; HR defective: dotted line,
                              not visible in G1). Responses were modelled for G1 (left) and G2 (right), for short and long times (top, bottom
                              respectively). Point types represent different cell lines and defects, and are coloured according to source
                              publication (green Beucher et al.28, blue Kühne et al.27). Mutations represented are: 1: XLF mutant, 2: DNA
                              Lig-IV mutant; 3: BRCA2 mutant; 4: Rad54 mutant.




                              Figure 2. Comparison of modelled rate of misrepair to measurements of incorrectly rejoined DNA
                              fragments via PFGE in normal human cells (From Löbrich et al., Rydberg et al.29,30). Although uncertainties
                              in these measurements are large, good correlation is seen over a wide range of doses.




Scientific Reports | 6:33290 | DOI: 10.1038/srep33290                                                                                           7
www.nature.com/scientificreports/




                              Figure 3. Comparison of experimental measurements and model predictions of chromosome aberrations
                              produced per cell. (a) Comparison of overall aberration rates as a function of dose in normal human cells
                              (circles, solid line), hamster-human hybrid cells (diamond, dotted line) and human cells with defective NHEJ
                              (triangles, dashed line), measured through Giemsa staining of cells irradiated in G118,22,31,33,34,36,37. Points are
                              coloured according to source publication. Good agreement is seen across a range of clinically relevant doses,
                              although there is significant inter-experimental heterogeneity between different reports. (b) Comparison of
                              aberration yields as a function of time for different doses delivered to cells in G2, assessed through premature
                              chromosome condensation in normal human fibroblasts32. The two bottom panels present data not included
                              in overall fitting, analysed to assess model robustness. (c) Comparison of yields of dicentrics (dashed line) and
                              total aberrations (solid line) from Cornforth et al.37. Although dicentrics data was not included in the fit, their
                              proportion is still accurately predicted. (d) Induction of chromosome aberrations of different classes exposed
                              at an extremely low dose rate (<​10 cGy/h)37, where intra-chromosome recombination is negligible. While only
                              acute exposures were included in fitting parameter set, once again good agreement is seen.


                              stain chromosomes or chromosome sub-regions. These techniques have different resolutions and are able to dis-
                              tinguish different events (for example, symmetric exchanges are frequently not visible under Giemsa staining),
                              making it difficult to make direct comparisons between the results of different studies.
                                  In this work, total numbers of chromosome aberrations as a function of dose were obtained from the litera-
                              ture for cells irradiated in G1 and Giemsa-stained at first mitosis18,31–37. This assay is sensitive to the formation
                              of dicentrics, large deletions, and rings, and so these observations were compared to model predictions for total
                              yields of dicentrics (Ndic) and large deletions (Ndel>3Mbp), as plotted in Fig. 3a. Although there is considerable
                              inter-experimental variation between studies, the overall trend is well reflected across the range of doses consid-
                              ered here. In addition, good correlation is seen for cells with a NHEJ defect, and in human-hamster hybrid cells
                              with a differing genome size and chromosome number.
                                  A similar approach can be applied in the G2 phase of the cell cycle, to aberrations measured through the
                              use of premature chromatin condensation (PCC)32. As this technique can measure aberration yields at specific
                              time-points, the kinetics of aberration formation can be quantified. In G2, in addition to the inter-chromosome
                              and large deletion events visible in G1, inter-arm events (Ninterarm) are also visible, due to the presence of the sister
                              chromatid. Figure 3b compares the observations and model predictions as a function of time. Good agreement
                              can be seen, demonstrating the link between DNA repair kinetics and misrepair, as well as the incorporation of
                              the increased visibility of aberrations in G2 and the increased fidelity of repair by homologous recombination.
                                  While model parameters were determined based on the total yield of aberrations following acute radiation
                              exposures, some other endpoints have also been considered to test model assumptions. Specifically, the relative
                              yield of different aberration types (dicentrics vs deletions) and the yield of aberrations at very low dose rates were


Scientific Reports | 6:33290 | DOI: 10.1038/srep33290                                                                                                8
www.nature.com/scientificreports/




                              Figure 4. Comparison of modelled yields of mutation in the HPRT gene for Chinese Hamster cells
                              irradiated in G1 (circles, solid line)38–40, and the fraction of point mutations (triangles, dashed line)40.
                              Points are coloured according to source publication. Overall yield of significant gene damage is accurately
                              reflected, as is the yield of small point mutations, which was not included in fitting data set.



                              compared to model predictions, without being included in the model fitting data. As can be seen in Fig. 3c,d, the
                              model broadly reproduces the total yield of dicentrics as a function of total aberrations, both for acute exposures
                              (3c) and exposures at extremely low dose rates (3d, dose rate <​0.1 Gy h−1) where multiple-DSB interactions are
                              extremely rare. For the low dose-rate analysis, this is achieved by setting η =​ 0 when calculating repair kinetics,
                              preventing any misrepair resulting from multiple DSBs rejoining.
                                  These results indicate that the simple model of non-overlapping chromosomes applied here does not dramat-
                              ically impact on the model’s applicability when considering whole-cell rates of genetic aberrations, and that its
                              predicted estimates for the base fidelities of DNA repair are also reasonable.

                              Mutations. Measurements of the rate of induction of mutation in the Hprt gene in Chinese Hamster cells
                              were obtained from the literature38–40 and compared to model predictions, as illustrated in Fig. 4. As in the
                              chromosome aberration analysis, these comparisons were made both for the total rate of mutations, which was
                              included in the fitting data set, as well as for the rate of point mutations which was excluded from the fitting data.
                              Good agreement is seen, indicating that the DNA repair model is also applicable to considering the impact of
                              misrepair on specific genetic sub-regions.

                              Survival. As described above, by considering an exponential dependence between aberration yield and cell
                              survival, predictions of survival can be generated from the DNA repair model for non-cycling cells. These pre-
                              dictions were compared to data from a series of hamster and human cell lines23,27,41,47–51, selected for irradiations
                              in conditions where there was little sensitivity to cycling effects. For human fibroblast cells, this includes cells
                              irradiated and held in G1 for more than 24 hours before being plated for survival quantification. CHO cells were
                              irradiated in G1, but have a defective G1 checkpoint55 and so were not prevented from entering S phase and do
                              not undergo long-term arrest or apoptosis at the G1/S checkpoint. Comparison of model predictions and exper-
                              imental observations are shown for these cells in Fig. 5a,c. Despite no additional fitting parameters being used,
                              the mechanistic DNA model produces accurate predictions of radiation sensitivity for both repair-competent and
                              NHEJ-defective cells (solid and dashed lines respectively).
                                  In cycling cells, two main additional pathways contribute to cell death–mitotic catastrophe, and active cell
                              cycle arrest followed by senescence or apoptosis. As described above, both of these have been incorporated in the
                              current approach as a simple exponential death process in the current model based on initial yields of DSBs, with
                              the fit parameters (ϕ and ψ) presented in Table 1.
                                  Data for cells irradiated in mitosis was taken from a series of papers44,56,57 and is shown in Fig. 6, while CHO
                              cells irradiated in G2 and human fibroblasts irradiated while cycling in G1 are shown in Fig. 5b,d. Overall trends
                              are well described in all cases, reflecting numerous well-known aspects of radiation response, such as the greater
                              sensitivity of cycling cells to radiation, and the increased radiation resistance of NHEJ defective cells irradiated
                              in G2. Significant inter-experiment variation persists however, even on similar endpoints, because of differences
                              in mutant populations, varying cell cycle selections, plating techniques, and other subtly different experimental
                              conditions which are not currently explicitly incorporated in this model (e.g. in Fig. 5, one CHO cell line shows
                              survival an order of magnitude lower at high doses, perhaps due to the use of serum starvation to synchronise
                              these cells). This suggests that it is important not to over-fit to a particular set of experimental observations.
                                  Despite this, the model still reproduces the behaviour of cell lines well across a range of conditions with-
                              out cell-line specific fitting parameters. To quantify the model’s ability to stratify radiation sensitivity, Mean
                              Inactivation Doses (MID) were calculated for each data set and for the corresponding model prediction, and
                              compared in Fig. 7. The model effectively stratifies the sensitivity of different cell lines, with a high correlation
                              coefficient (R2 =​ 0.91; 0.96 if divergent CHO line is excluded). In most cases the model slightly over-estimates the
                              MID, suggesting that some death pathways are not yet fully accounted for. Thus while exact quantification of, for


Scientific Reports | 6:33290 | DOI: 10.1038/srep33290                                                                                             9
www.nature.com/scientificreports/




                              Figure 5. Comparison of modelled cell survival and experimental measurements for cells of different
                              genetic backgrounds in different conditions. (a) Survival in Chinese Hamster cells irradiated in G1, either
                              repair competent (CHO-K1, circles) or with defective NHEJ (triangles, diamonds). Curves are plotted for two
                              modelled cell lines, either CHO cells irradiated in G1 with fully competent repair (solid line) or with defective
                              NHEJ (dashed line). (b) Survival in CHO cells irradiated in G2, again either repair competent or with defective
                              NHEJ (points as in top left), compared to model predictions (lines). (c) Survival in human fibroblast lines
                              irradiated in G1, and held in G1 for over 24 hours before plating for survival assay to prevent G1 cell cycle arrest
                              and apoptosis. (d) Survival in human fibroblast lines irradiated in G1 and immediately plated for survival.
                              In lower panels, both normal (AGO-1522, MRC-5; circles) and NHEJ defective (180BR, 411BR; triangles,
                              diamonds) lines are considered, compared to model predictions for either normal (solid line) or NHEJ defective
                              (dashed line) cells, under similar plating conditions. Points are coloured according to source publication.
                              Good agreement is obtained in panels on the left solely from the DNA repair model, as no parameters from the
                              survival fit are needed to predict responses in these conditions. Panels on the right incorporate mitotic death
                              and apoptosis, as described in the main text, to explain these additional conditions. Human data from27,37,49,50,
                              hamster data from23,47,48,51.



                              example, α/β ratios may prove challenging for a specific experimental condition, the model still has the potential
                              to make useful predictions about overall sensitivity.

                              Discussion
                              A primary driver in modern medicine is the movement towards treatment personalisation for a patient’s unique
                              disease, to derive maximum clinical benefit from new or established techniques. While radiotherapy has long
                              been personalised based on geometric factors, tailoring of treatment dose and fractionation remains in its infancy.
                              A key limiting factor is the lack of models with which to predict the sensitivity of an individual’s cancer. This is a
                              particularly pressing need as our understanding of key pathways in radiation response has improved significantly
                              in recent years, supported by molecular and cellular biology experiments as well as improved models of key path-
                              ways, offering a wealth of information which could be incorporated into clinical decision-making.
                                  We have developed a general framework of cellular radiation response characterised using cellular phenotypic
                              characteristics that can produce predictions of a range of endpoints including DNA repair, genetic aberration, and
                              cellular survival. While other models have sought to make use of similar mechanistic approaches to radiation res
                              ponse16–18,35,58,59, we believe this is the first such model to explicitly incorporate this range of underlying mecha-
                              nistic processes and endpoints together with cell survival in a single model.
                                  This approach has several benefits. Firstly, by developing a single model which incorporates a range of
                              endpoints, data from different experiments can be combined to inform and constrain model parameters in a
                              way which is not possible when considering empirical fitting functions. For example, this can be seen in the


Scientific Reports | 6:33290 | DOI: 10.1038/srep33290                                                                                           10
www.nature.com/scientificreports/




                              Figure 6. Comparison of modelled cell survival and experimental observation for cells irradiated in
                              mitosis. Symbols correspond to different cell lines, and are coloured according to source publication. For these
                              highly-sensitive cells, death is dominated by mitotic catastrophe following unrepaired DSBs generated during
                              mitosis. Data from44,56,57.




                              Figure 7. Stratification of cell sensitivity by model predictions, for mean inactivation dose (MID, points),
                              compared to equality (solid line). Cells with identical genetic backgrounds and exposure conditions have
                              equal model MIDs (X-axis), but a sometimes large spread in observed MID (Y-axis). However, despite this the
                              model effectively stratifies across a broad range of radiation sensitivities, within experimental variation between
                              reports on similar cell lines. Model cells tend to be more radiation-resistant than experimental observations
                              (best-fit slope 0.91) which suggests some modes of cell death remain unaccounted for. However, the overall
                              correlation remains high (R2 =​ 0.96), indicating good predictive power.



                              combination of H2AX kinetic and aberration data to characterise how repair processes fail, or the use of a single
                              model to describe both mutation and aberration formation using a single set of fitting parameters, without the
                              need to introduce an empirical scaling factor linking them. Thus while the model incorporates 11 parameters–9
                              characterising DNA repair, and 2 cell death rates-the fit was carried out across nearly 200 experimental meas-
                              urements across multiple endpoints, numerous cellular phenotypes, and varying experimental conditions. As
                              a result, the optimum parameter set is very stable and reproducible, with small confidence intervals on most
                              parameters and a limited covariance between parameters (see Supplementary Information). Future developments
                              which make use of additional mechanistic measurements (such as rates of senescence or apoptosis) may enable a
                              further refinement of these parameters.
                                  Another benefit is that in addition to the endpoints explicitly fit here, many established aspects of radiation
                              biology emerge from this model. For example, while the majority of experiments analysed in this work con-
                              sider single fraction high dose-rate exposures, the model can be naturally extended to prolonged exposures or
                              multi-fraction treatments by incorporating the induction of DSBs in a time-dependent manner, applying the
                              same rules as used in the acute exposure case. Additionally, the current model focuses on X-ray exposures which
                              are assumed to induce DSBs uniformly and randomly throughout the cell nucleus, neglecting any dependence
                              on the linear energy transfer (LET). While this is a reasonable approximation, there is known to be some var-
                              iation in biological effectiveness for X-rays. Higher LET radiations such as protons or heavier ions can diverge


Scientific Reports | 6:33290 | DOI: 10.1038/srep33290                                                                                         11
www.nature.com/scientificreports/


                              significantly from this approximation, inducing heterogeneously distributed DSBs with differing dose depend-
                              ence. Incorporation of models to provide radiation-quality dependent DSB information may provide additional
                              insights and the possibility of extending the model to applications such as the calculation of RBE15,21.
                                  However, significant developments are required before this model can be applied in a general clinical setting.
                              As the model currently focuses on in vitro responses, factors such as cellular heterogeneity and oxygen availability
                              are not incorporated, despite being known to significantly impact clinical radiation responses. One approach to
                              address this limitation would be the integration of the model into a 3D agent-based system60,61. In this approach
                              individual cells are simulated within a three-dimensional tumour volume, which enables the incorporation of
                              both cellular heterogeneity as well as spatially dependent variables such as oxygenation level in a spatially realistic
                              tumour model.
                                  The delivery of personalised radiotherapy will also depend on the development of more refined models of
                              the genetic drivers of radiation response processes. In the current work much of the detail of underlying genetic
                              mechanisms is not considered, with a single model applied across all species and pathways treated either as
                              fully functional or fully defective. In reality, cellular processes depend in a complex fashion on a range of inter-
                              connected genes, all of which can have different impacts and may differ across species. The differential impact
                              of genes can be seen in the small differences in sensitivity between xrs6 and V3 cells in Fig. 5. While both cells
                              are treated as identically NHEJ defective, in reality their mutations (in Ku80 and DNA-PKcs respectively) have
                              slightly different impacts on DNA repair or radiosensitivity.
                                  While the current approach is sufficient to demonstrate the viability of the model, explicitly incorporating
                              models of the underlying genetic pathways driving these effects will enable more granular models of the impact
                              of tumour genetics. In this way, rather than population-level models of pathway failure, quantitative estimation
                              of the degree of disruption can be generated for an individual tumour’s genetic information, rather than simply
                              classifying a cell as, for example, NHEJ defective or competent.
                                  By applying this approach to a tumour’s genetic information across all pathways involved in radiation
                              response, an individualised model of the availability of these processes can be generated (e.g. individual values
                              of pf, ps and pm), which can be combined with the mechanistic parameters obtained in this work to provide
                              personalised predictions of radiosensitivity. As the acquisition of tumour genotypes is becoming increasingly
                              affordable and part of the standard of care for many patients, this offers a natural complement to the growing
                              personalisation in other aspects of cancer therapy. If clinically validated this approach may also be extensible to
                              other clinical applications, beginning with other genotoxic agents (e.g. cisplatin, doxorubicin) whose effects are
                              driven primarily by DNA damage, but also potentially to other agents whose fundamental mechanisms of action
                              are sufficiently well known.
                                  In conclusion, we have developed a mechanistic model of radiation response incorporating a range of key
                              radiation response pathways and clinically relevant endpoints. This model has been shown to accurately describe
                              responses for a range of scales and endpoints with a set of mechanistic fitting parameters which are common
                              across all cell lines, enabling the integration of knowledge from a range of experimental measurements. This
                              model has the potential to offer a foundation for the development of a novel tool to deliver individualised predic-
                              tions of radiosensitivity in the future.

                              References
                               1. Bedford, J. & Dewey, W. Historical and Current Highlights in Radiation Biology : Has Anything Important Been Learned by
                                  Irradiating Cells? Radiat. Res. 291, 251–291 (2009).
                               2. Kirkpatrick, J. P., Brenner, D. J. & Orton, C. G. The linear-quadratic model is inappropriate to model high dose per fraction effects
                                  in radiosurgery. Med. Phys. 36, 3381–3384 (2009).
                               3. Fowler, J. F. 21 Years of biologically effective dose. Br. J. Radiol. 83, 554–568 (2010).
                               4. Cooke, S. L. et al. Intra-tumour genetic heterogeneity and poor chemoradiotherapy response in cervical cancer. Br. J. Cancer 104,
                                  361–368 (2011).
                               5. Webb, S. & Nahum, A. E. A model for calculating tumour control probability in radiotherapy including the effects of inhomogeneous
                                  distributions of dose and clonogenic cell density. Phys. Med. Biol. 38, 653–666 (1993).
                               6. Hsu, Y.-C. et al. A Four-Gene Signature from NCI-60 Cell Line for Survival Prediction in Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer. Clin. Cancer
                                  Res. 15, 7309–7315 (2009).
                               7. Eschrich, S. A. et al. Validation of a radiosensitivity molecular signature in breast cancer. Clin. Cancer Res. 18, 5134–5143 (2012).
                               8. Curtis, S. B. Lethal and potentially lethal lesions induced by radiation–a unified repair model. Radiat. Res. 106, 252–270 (1986).
                               9. Tobias, C. a. The repair-misrepair model in radiobiology: comparison to other models. Radiat. Res. Suppl. 8, S77–S95 (1985).
                              10. Brenner, D. J., Hlatky, L. R., Hahnfeldt, P. J., Huang, Y. & Sachs, R. K. The linear-quadratic model and most other common
                                  radiobiological models result in similar predictions of time-dose relationships. Radiat. Res. 150, 83–91 (1998).
                              11. Wouters, B. G. & Brown, J. M. Cells at intermediate oxygen levels can be more important than the ‘hypoxic fraction’ in determining
                                  tumor response to fractionated radiotherapy. Radiat. Res. 147, 541–550 (1997).
                              12. Paganetti, H. Relative biological effectiveness (RBE) values for proton beam therapy. Variations as a function of biological endpoint,
                                  dose, and linear energy transfer. Phys. Med. Biol. 59, R419–R472 (2014).
                              13. Kempf, H., Hatzikirou, H., Bleicher, M. & Meyer-Hermann, M. In silico analysis of cell cycle synchronisation effects in radiotherapy
                                  of tumour spheroids. Plos Comput. Biol. 9, e1003295 (2013).
                              14. Wodarz, D., Sorace, R. & Komarova, N. L. Dynamics of cellular responses to radiation. Plos Comput. Biol. 10, e1003513 (2014).
                              15. Semenenko, V. a. & Stewart, R. D. Fast Monte Carlo simulation of DNA damage formed by electrons and light ions. Phys. Med. Biol.
                                  51, 1693–1706 (2006).
                              16. Friedrich, T., Durante, M. & Scholz, M. Modeling Cell Survival after Photon Irradiation Based on Double-Strand Break Clustering
                                  in Megabase Pair Chromatin Loops. Radiat. Res. 178, 385–394 (2012).
                              17. Taleei, R. & Nikjoo, H. Biochemical DSB-repair model for mammalian cells in G1 and early S phases of the cell cycle. Mutat. Res.
                                  756, 206–212 (2013).
                              18. Ponomarev, A. L., George, K. & Cucinotta, F. A. Computational model of chromosome aberration yield induced by high- and low-
                                  LET radiation exposures. Radiat. Res. 177, 727–737 (2012).
                              19. Liu, C., Li, C.-Y. & Yuan, F. Mathematical modeling of the phoenix rising pathway. Plos Comput. Biol. 10, e1003461 (2014).
                              20. McMahon, S. J. et al. A Kinetic-Based Model of Radiation-Induced Intercellular Signalling. Plos One 8, e54526 (2013).




Scientific Reports | 6:33290 | DOI: 10.1038/srep33290                                                                                                               12
www.nature.com/scientificreports/


                              21. Charlton, D. E., Nikjoo, H. & Humm, J. L. Calculation of initial yields of single- and double-strand breaks in cell nuclei from
                                  electrons, protons and alpha particles. Int. J. Radiat. Biol. 56, 1–19 (1989).
                              22. Sachs, R., Chen, A. & Brenner, D. Review: proximity effects in the production of chromosome aberrations by ionizing radiation. Int.
                                  J. Radiat. Biol. 71, 1–19 (1997).
                              23. Rothkamm, K. et al. Pathways of DNA Double-Strand Break Repair during the Mammalian Cell Cycle. Mol. Cell. Biol. 23,
                                  5706–5715 (2003).
                              24. Iliakis, G., Murmann, T. & Soni, A. Alternative end-joining repair pathways are the ultimate backup for abrogated classical non-
                                  homologous end-joining and homologous recombination repair: Implications for the formation of chromosome translocations.
                                  Mutat. Res. Toxicol. Environ. Mutagen. 793, 1–10 (2015).
                              25. Hlatky, L., Sachs, R. K., Vazquez, M. & Cornforth, M. N. Radiation-induced chromosome aberrations: Insights gained from
                                  biophysical modeling. BioEssays 24, 714–723 (2002).
                              26. Sculley, D. G., Dawson, P. A., Emmerson, B. T. & Gordon, R. B. A review of the molecular basis of hypoxanthine-guanine
                                  phosphoribosyltransferase (HPRT) deficiency. Hum. Genet. 90, 195–207 (1992).
                              27. Kühne, M. et al. A Double-Strand Break Repair Defect in ATM-Deficient Cells Contributes to Radiosensitivity. Cancer Res. 64,
                                  500–508 (2004).
                              28. Beucher, A. et al. ATM and Artemis promote homologous recombination of radiation-induced DNA double-strand breaks in G2.
                                  EMBO J. 28, 3413–3427 (2009).
                              29. Löbrich, M., Kühne, M., Wetzel, J. & Rothkamm, K. Joining of correct and incorrect DNA double-strand break ends in normal
                                  human and ataxia telangiectasia fibroblasts. Genes Chromosom. Cancer 27, 59–68 (2000).
                              30. Rydberg, B., Cooper, B., Cooper, P. K., Holley, W. R. & Chatterjee, A. Dose-dependent misrejoining of radiation-induced DNA
                                  double-strand breaks in human fibroblasts: experimental and theoretical study for high- and low-LET radiation. Radiat. Res. 163,
                                  526–534 (2005).
                              31. George, K. a et al. Dose response of gamma rays and iron nuclei for induction of chromosomal aberrations in normal and repair-
                                  deficient cell lines. Radiat. Res. 171, 752–763 (2009).
                              32. Gotoh, E., Kawata, T. & Durante, M. Chromatid break rejoining and exchange aberration formation following gamma-ray exposure:
                                  analysis in G2 human fibroblasts by chemically induced premature chromosome condensation. Int. J. Radiat. Biol. 75, 1129–1135
                                  (1999).
                              33. Virsik-Kopp, P., Rave-Frank, M., Hofman-Huther, H. & Schmidberger, H. Role of DNA-PK in the process of aberration formation
                                  as studied in irradiated human glioblastoma cell lines M059K and M059J. Int. J. Radiat. Biol. 79, 61–68 (2003).
                              34. Schmid, T. E. et al. The effectiveness of 20 mev protons at nanosecond pulse lengths in producing chromosome aberrations in
                                  human-hamster hybrid cells. Radiat. Res. 175, 719–727 (2011).
                              35. Sachs, R. K., Brenner, D. J., Hahnfeldt, P. J. & Hlatkys, L. R. A formalism for analysing large-scale clustering of radiation-induced
                                  breaks along chromosomes. Int. J. Radiat. Biol. 74, 185–206 (1998).
                              36. Simpson, P. & Savage, J. Dose-response curves for simple and complex chromosome aberrations induced by X-rays and detected
                                  using fluorescence in situ hybridization. Int. J. Radiat. Biol. 69, 429–436 (1996).
                              37. Cornforth, M. N., Bailey, S. M. & Goodwin, E. H. Dose responses for chromosome aberrations produced in noncycling primary
                                  human fibroblasts by alpha particles, and by gamma rays delivered at sublimiting low dose rates. Radiat. Res. 158, 43–53 (2002).
                              38. Morgan, T. L. et al. Molecular characterization of X-ray-induced mutations at the HPRT locus in plateau-phase Chinese hamster
                                  ovary cells. Mutat. Res. Fundam. Mol. Mech. Mutagen. 232, 171–182 (1990).
                              39. Belli, M. et al. RBE-LET relationships for cell inactivation and mutation induced by low energy protons in V79 cells: further results
                                  at the LNL facility. Int. J. Radiat. Biol. 74, 501–509 (1998).
                              40. Schwartz, J. L., Jordan, R., Sun, J., Ma, H. & Hsieb, a W. Dose-dependent changes in the spectrum of mutations induced by ionizing
                                  radiation. Radiat. Res. 153, 312–317 (2000).
                              41. Cornforth, M. & Bedford, J. A quantitative comparison of potentially lethal damage repair and the rejoining of interphase
                                  chromosome breaks in low passage normal human fibroblasts. Radiat. Res. 111, 385–405 (1987).
                              42. Heijink, A. M., Krajewska, M. & van Vugt, M. A. T. M. The DNA damage response during mitosis. Mutat. Res. Mol. Mech. Mutagen.
                                  750, 45–55 (2013).
                              43. Löbrich, M. & Jeggo, P. The impact of a negligent G2/M checkpoint on genomic instability and cancer induction. Nat. Rev. Cancer 7,
                                  861–869 (2007).
                              44. Biade, S., Stobbe, C. C. & Chapman, J. D. The intrinsic radiosensitivity of some human tumor cells throughout their cell cycles.
                                  Radiat. Res. 147, 416–421 (1997).
                              45. Cohen–Jonathan, E., Bernhard, E. J. & McKenna, W. G. How does radiation kill cells? Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol. 3, 77–83 (1999).
                              46. Di Leonardo, A., Linke, S. P., Clarkin, K. & Wahl, G. M. DNA damage triggers a prolonged p53-dependent G1 arrest and long-term
                                  induction of Cip1 in normal human fibroblasts. Genes Dev. 8, 2540–2551 (1994).
                              47. Freyer, J. P., Jarrett, K., Carpenter, S. & Raju, M. R. Oxygen enhancement ratio as a function of dose and cell cycle phase for radiation-
                                  resistant and sensitive CHO cells. Radiat. Res. 127, 297–307 (1991).
                              48. Hu, Q. & Hill, R. P. Radiosensitivity, apoptosis and repair of DNA double-strand breaks in radiation-sensitive Chinese hamster ovary
                                  cell mutants treated at different dose rates. Radiat. Res. 146, 636–645 (1996).
                              49. Kasten-Pisula, U., Tastan, H. & Dikomey, E. Huge differences in cellular radiosensitivity due to only very small variations in double-
                                  strand break repair capacity. Int. J. Radiat. Biol. 81, 409–419 (2005).
                              50. Liu, C. et al. A comparison of chromosome repair kinetics in G(0) and G(1) reveals that enhanced repair fidelity under noncycling
                                  conditions accounts for increased potentially lethal damage repair. Radiat. Res. 174, 566–573 (2010).
                              51. Lin, Y.-F. et al. Differential radiosensitivity phenotypes of DNA-PKcs mutations affecting NHEJ and HRR systems following
                                  irradiation with gamma-rays or very low fluences of alpha particles. Plos One 9, e93579 (2014).
                              52. Rothkamm, K. et al. Laboratory Intercomparison on the γ​-H2AX Foci Assay. Radiat. Res. 180, 149–155 (2013).
                              53. Rothkamm, K. & Horn, S. gamma-H2AX as protein biomarker for radiation exposure. Ann. Ist. Super. Sanita 45, 265–271 (2009).
                              54. Speicher, M. R., Gwyn Ballard, S. & Ward, D. C. Karyotyping human chromosomes by combinatorial multi-fluor FISH. Nat. Genet.
                                  12, 368–375 (1996).
                              55. Hu, T., Miller, C. M., Ridder, G. M. & Aardema, M. J. Characterization of p53 in Chinese hamster cell lines CHO-K1, CHO-WBL,
                                  and CHL: Implications for genotoxicity testing. Mutat. Res.-Fundam. Mol. Mech. Mutagen. 426, 51–62 (1999).
                              56. Stobbe, C. C., Park, S. J. & Chapman, J. D. The radiation hypersensitivity of cells at mitosis. Int. J. Radiat. Biol. 78, 1149–1157 (2002).
                              57. Giunta, S., Belotserkovskaya, R. & Jackson, S. P. DNA damage signaling in response to double-strand breaks during mitosis. J. Cell
                                  Biol. 190, 197–207 (2010).
                              58. Herr, L., Friedrich, T., Durante, M. & Scholz, M. A model of photon cell killing based on the spatio-temporal clustering of DNA
                                  damage in higher order chromatin structures. Plos One 9 (2014).
                              59. Sachs, R. K. et al. Clustering of radiation-produced breaks along chromosomes: modelling the effects on chromosome aberrations.
                                  Int J Radiat Biol 75, 657–672 (1999).
                              60. McMahon, S. J. et al. A Computational Model of Cellular Response to Modulated Radiation Fields. Int. J. Radiat. Oncol. Biol. Phys.
                                  84, 250–256 (2012).
                              61. Waclaw, B. et al. Spatial model predicts dispersal and cell turnover cause reduced intra-tumor heterogeneity. Nature 525, 261–267
                                  (2015).


Scientific Reports | 6:33290 | DOI: 10.1038/srep33290                                                                                                                    13
www.nature.com/scientificreports/


                              Acknowledgements
                              S.J.M. would like to thank the European Commission (EC FP7 grant MC-IOF-623630) for supporting this work.

                              Author Contributions
                              S.J.M. developed and implemented the model and drafted the manuscript, based on discussions with J.S., H.P. and
                              K.M.P. All authors reviewed and approved the final manuscript.

                              Additional Information
                              Supplementary information accompanies this paper at http://www.nature.com/srep
                              Competing financial interests: The authors declare no competing financial interests.
                              How to cite this article: McMahon, S. J. et al. Mechanistic Modelling of DNA Repair and Cellular Survival
                              Following Radiation-Induced DNA Damage. Sci. Rep. 6, 33290; doi: 10.1038/srep33290 (2016).
                                             This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License. The images
                                             or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license,
                              unless indicated otherwise in the credit line; if the material is not included under the Creative Commons license,
                              users will need to obtain permission from the license holder to reproduce the material. To view a copy of this
                              license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/

                              © The Author(s) 2016




Scientific Reports | 6:33290 | DOI: 10.1038/srep33290                                                                                         14
