                                HHS Public Access
                                Author manuscript
                                Phys Med Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2026 February 14.




Author Manuscript
                    Published in final edited form as:
                     Phys Med Biol. ; 70(20): . doi:10.1088/1361-6560/ae117e.



                    Extending the Microdosimetry Gamma Model (MGM) to estimate
                    induced DNA damage and its complexity at macroscopic scale
                    by protons and helium ions
                    Victor V. Onecha1,
                    Jan Schuemann1,
                    Harald Paganetti1,




Author Manuscript
                    Alejandro Bertolet1
                    1Department of Radiation Oncology, Massachusetts General Hospital, and Harvard Medical

                    School

                    Abstract
                         Objective: DNA damage, particularly DSB, is the primary mechanism for cell death in radiation
                         therapy. High-LET particles, like protons and helium ions, induce more complex DSB than
                         photons, increasing their biological effectiveness. Simulating particle transport at the DNA level
                         with Monte Carlo codes is computationally intensive, often limiting studies to single cells. This
                         study presents an efficient method using the Microdosimetric Gamma Model (MGM) to estimate
                         DSB numbers and complexity in macroscopic setups.




Author Manuscript
                         Approach: The MGM analytically predicts the number of DSBs and their complexity induced
                         by protons or α-particles. We integrated it into the TOPAS Monte Carlo toolkit (TOPAS-MGM),
                         enabling the calculation of DNA damage at macroscale scenarios. We have calculated DNA
                         damage distributions in in-vitro-like geometries and water phantoms with proton and helium
                         beams.

                         Results: Cross-comparisons with TOPAS-nBio show that the DNA damage outputs from
                         macroscopic simulations are consistent and 100,000 times faster than DNA scale simulations.
                         We tested DNA damage induction with proton and helium ion beams and alpha-emitting
                         radiopharmaceuticals. For clinical beams, the DNA along the beam path showed a significant
                         increase in the number of induced DSB and their complexity at the Bragg peak, especially
                         with helium ions. Radiopharmaceuticals induced a markedly heterogeneous number of damages




Author Manuscript
                         compared to beams.

                         Significance: This work offers a method to simulate DNA damage and its complexity in
                         macroscale scenarios for protons and α-particles. The output could potentially be used to predict




                    Corresponding Author: Alejandro Bertolet, PhD, 100 Blossom St, Cox 802D, Boston, MA – 02114, abertoletreina@mgh.harvard.edu.
                    First Author: Victor V. Onecha, PhD, 125 Nashua Street, Suite 320, Boston, MA – 02114, vonecha@mgh.harvard.edu
                    Author contribution: V.V.O. and A.B. were equally involved in the conceptualization and design of the study. V.V.O. developed
                    the software utilized for this article under the supervision of A.B, J.S. and H.P. All authors were involved in data analysis and
                    interpretation. V.V.O. wrote the first draft of the manuscript, and all authors commented and contributed to the final version. A.B.
                    provided funding for the study.
                    Onecha et al.                                                                                                Page 2


                             cell killing based on DNA repair models or to assess the biological effectiveness of particle




Author Manuscript
                             therapy using DNA damage and complexity as key metrics.

                       Keywords
                             DNA damage; TOPAS-nBio; microdosimetry; MGM; particle therapy; RPT


                       Introduction
                                       Absorbed dose is known as the main predictor of response in radiation therapy. However,
                                       dose is not univocally related to biological effects. For instance, heavy-charged particle
                                       therapies, including protons, helium, or carbon ion therapy, are biologically more effective
                                       than conventional X-ray therapies (Paganetti 2022, Underwood et al 2022, Helm and
                                       Fournier 2023). The ratio between the doses required to achieve the same biological effect




Author Manuscript
                                       for particle therapy compared to reference radiation, e.g., X-rays, is known as the relative
                                       biological effectiveness (RBE) (Choi and Kang 2012). A constant RBE equal to 1.1 is
                                       assumed (Paganetti et al 2002, Underwood and McMahon 2019, Paganetti 2014) in clinical
                                       practice for proton therapy. In contrast, for helium or carbon ions, RBE is characterized by
                                       complex models based on biophysical principles (Karger and Peschke 2017). These models
                                       link the physical properties of the beam and the expected biological response to radiation.

                                       RBE models compare how a given cell, tumor, or tissue responds to different types of
                                       radiation. These comparisons are typically accomplished by phenomenological models that
                                       use fitting parameters to explain the observed differences in response. However, modeling
                                       accurately this relative response is challenging, as it depends on multiple factors such
                                       as linear energy transfer (LET), particle mass, and charge, besides biological variabilities
                                       across cells and tissues. Despite efforts to refine RBE models (McNamara et al 2015, Tian et




Author Manuscript
                                       al 2022), it is well-established that DNA damage induction (DDI) is the primary mechanism
                                       of radiation-induced cell death, and it is followed by DNA damage response (DDR), which
                                       deals with repair of the damage through a variety of molecular pathways that determine
                                       the cell fate (Sia et al 2020, Huang and Zhou 2020, khodamoradi et al 2020). While
                                       DDI depends on the early interactions between radiation and DNA, DDR is composed of
                                       complex biological processes that vary significantly between cell types. A key advantage of
                                       quantifying DDI s that it provides a consistent starting point from which DDR mechanisms
                                       can be studied independently from cell to cell. However, computational power limitations
                                       restrict DNA damage calculations to small-scale scenarios, which limits the development of
                                       DDR studies.

                                       Studies aiming at calculating DNA damage in terms of double-strand breaks (DSB) induced




Author Manuscript
                                       by different radiation modalities utilize Monte Carlo (MC) codes, such as PARTRAC
                                       (Friedland et al 2011), Geant4-DNA, or applications using it, such as TOPAS-nBio, which
                                       enable the simulation of energy deposition in cellular DNA with a high level of detail
                                       (Tamborino et al 2022, Chatzipapas et al 2023, Zhu et al 2020). These studies primarily
                                       focus on a single generic cell due to high computational demands (Tamborino et al 2022,
                                       Chatzipapas et al 2023, Zhu et al 2020). This computational limitation restricts the number
                                       of cells that can be considered in the simulations, which in turn limits the ability to perform



                                          Phys Med Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2026 February 14.
                    Onecha et al.                                                                                             Page 3


                                    detailed statistical analyses of DNA damage. To address this limitation, it has been proposed




Author Manuscript
                                    to use precalculated tables with the DNA damage response based on the initial energy of
                                    the electron reaching the nucleus (Lim et al 2023). However, there still remains a need for
                                    efficient tools for high-throughput calculation of DDI for high LET particles, i.e., protons or
                                    helium ions.

                                    Beyond the number of DSBs, another important factor is their complexity. Complexity
                                    refers to how severe the DNA damage is in terms of the amount of damage within a few
                                    base pairs (Goodhead and Weinfeld 2024, Jezkova et al 2018, Nakano et al 2022). High
                                    LET is linked to high local concentrations of ionizations, resulting in more complex DNA
                                    damage, affecting multiple nucleotides in short DNA sequences (Stewart et al 2011, Oeck et
                                    al 2018, Roobol et al 2020). Complex DNA damage impairs the repair ability of cells and
                                    strongly conditions DDR, leading to an increase in radiation-induced cytotoxicity (Nickoloff
                                    et al 2020, Mladenova et al 2022, Wilkinson et al 2023, Heemskerk et al 2025, Goodhead




Author Manuscript
                                    and Weinfeld 2024). Therefore, complexity should be considered in radiation-induced DNA
                                    damage models, as it might be a key factor in explaining differential cell responses to the
                                    same number of induced DSBs.

                                    This work introduces an accelerated method to estimate DSB and its complexity
                                    induced by ions in macroscopic setups involving hundreds of cells by implementing the
                                    Microdosimetric Gamma Model (MGM) (Bertolet et al 2023) within the TOPAS MC
                                    toolkit (Faddegon et al 2020, Perl et al 2012) version OpenTOPAS (RRID:SCR_026927).
                                    The MGM model proposes a definition of complexity based on sugar-phosphate backbone
                                    and base damages and analytically computes the number of DSB and their complexity
                                    distribution induced by protons or helium ions through a gamma distribution, which depends
                                    on the LET of the particle reaching the nuclei.




Author Manuscript
                       Methods and Materials
                       Microdosimetric Gamma Model (MGM)
                                    The MGM (Bertolet et al 2023) is an analytical implementation to calculate DNA damage
                                    induced by protons or α-particles in cell nuclei as a function of their frequency-mean
                                    lineal energy (yF ). This microdosimetric quantity represents the average energy deposited
                                    within the nucleus in a single-track passage (primary and secondary particles) divided by
                                    the nucleus-corresponding mean-chord length (l). The MGM is based on the calculation of
                                    DNA damage in a spherical nucleus of 9.65 μm in diameter made of liquid water filled
                                    in with a fractal pattern of explicit DNA structure using TOPAS-nBio (Schuemann et al
                                    2018a, Zhu et al 2020, McNamara et al 2020), as used before in similar studies (Bertolet et




Author Manuscript
                                    al 2023, Katugampola et al 2022). The MGM accounts for both the direct damage caused
                                    by radiation and the indirect damage from free radicals, with each type of damage being
                                    quantified separately (Ramos-Méndez et al 2021).

                                    In the context of the MGM, DNA damage sites are characterized by clustered breaks
                                    of DNA nucleotides -either nitrogenous bases or their sugar-phosphate backbones- in a
                                    short stretch of the DNA molecule. In this work, we utilized the concept of Multiply
                                    Damage Site (MDS) (Goodhead and Weinfeld 2024, Ward 1985) to characterize clustered


                                       Phys Med Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2026 February 14.
                    Onecha et al.                                                                                               Page 4


                                    damage sites. MDS were defined as stretches of DNA containing at least two damaged




Author Manuscript
                                    backbones in complementary strands in less than 10 base pairs (DSB). Complexity of
                                    an MDS was defined as the number of nucleotides damaged in a sequence of DNA so
                                    that no more than 10 base pairs of distance exist between damages (Bertolet et al 2023).
                                    Thus, an MDS with a simple DSB has complexity 2. As shown in our previous work,
                                    the number of induced MDS follows a quadratic expression with respect to yF, based
                                    on TOPAS-nBio simulations: NMDS yF = 0.13 yF + 9.66 * 10−4 yF2 . In a similar way, the
                                    complexity of a damaged site or MDS can be selected from a Gamma distribution function
                                                b yF a yF       a yF − 1 −b yF C
                                    f C: yF = Γ a y         C          e           , where a yF and b yF are parameters dependent on
                                                   F
                                    yF , C is the complexity, and Γ denotes the Gamma function.


                       Implementing MGM in TOPAS




Author Manuscript
                                    In the track-structure MC used in TOPAS-nBio, every secondary electron generated after
                                    ionization is tracked, and the deposited energy is computed step-by-step along its trajectory.
                                    Consequently, when a particle crosses a nucleus, some transferred energy can be carried
                                    outside by secondary particles as shown in Figure 1.A. On the contrary, condensed-history
                                    MC approaches reduce the number of secondary particles explicitly simulated and assume
                                    that all their energy is deposited locally in a single step. In this case, a predefined threshold
                                    based on particle energy or range is usually set before the simulation, and particles that
                                    do not meet this threshold are not tracked. Typical thresholds used in medical applications
                                    for macroscopic scenarios are set according to voxel sizes of several millimeters, meaning
                                    that most electrons generated by ionization from protons or alpha particles are not explicitly
                                    tracked. As a consequence, when a particle crosses a nucleus, all the energy is considered to
                                    be deposited inside, as shown in Figure 1.B, leading to an overestimation of the deposited




Author Manuscript
                                    energy with respect to the track-structure approach.

                                    In this work, we have adapted the formulation of the MGM to overcome this limitation
                                    and to make it work in macroscopic scenarios where the condensed history approach is
                                    used. The MGM implementation works as follows: 1) Every time a proton or α-particle
                                    traverses a nucleus we compute the entrance and exit position (A & B), the energy deposited
                                    between them and calculate y. 2) The number of induced MDS is computed based on
                                    y and the original MGM formulation, denoted NMGM. 3) We apply a correction factor
                                    that accounts for the difference in energy deposition between the track-structure and the
                                    condensed-history approaches to compute the correct number of induced MDS, denoted
                                    NMDS. In this correction, we assumed that the portion of energy deposited outside the
                                    nucleus depends on the particle track length when considering the nucleus as a sphere. Short




Author Manuscript
                                    track lengths correspond to interactions in the periphery of the nucleus, where secondary
                                    electrons are more likely to escape. The correction we propose is based on the ratio between
                                    the track length from A to B and the mean chord length (l), of the nucleus, which is the
                                    geometric parameter used in the original MGM to define the yF.,

                                    By default, the output of the proposed implementation is a list of all induced MDS,
                                    specifying the cell in which each event occurs and its corresponding complexity.
                                    Additionally, we have included the option to export DNA damage per cell using the


                                       Phys Med Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2026 February 14.
                    Onecha et al.                                                                                           Page 5


                                    Standard DNA Damage (SDD) format (Schuemann et al 2018b). The MGM formalism




Author Manuscript
                                    not only estimates the number of induced MDS, but also the associated base damage
                                    (BD), single-strand breaks (SSB), and the contribution of direct and indirect mechanisms.
                                    Our implementation includes a detailed characterization of each individual damage site
                                    in terms of nucleotide-level damage (BD and SSB) and their origin (direct or indirect).
                                    Since the DNA geometry is not explicitly simulated, the location of each damage site
                                    is randomly placed between the particle’s entrance (A) and exit (B) positions within the
                                    nucleus. Similarly, as the MGM does not provide structural information on chromosome
                                    organization, each damage site is randomly assigned to a chromosome number between 1
                                    and 23.

                       Cross-Verification versus TOPAS-nBio
                                    We performed a cross-verification analysis to compare the DDI, in terms of MDS and its




Author Manuscript
                                    complexity, calculated using (a) the MGM in macroscopic, condensed-history simulations
                                    with the G4EmLivermore physics model (Ivanchenko et al 2019) and (b) microscopic,
                                    track-structure simulations using the Geant4-DNA ‘option 2’ physics list (Incerti et al 2018,
                                    Margis et al 2020) used as a reference. Sections 1.1.1 and 1.1.2 in the Supplementary
                                    material contain all the information that the American Association of Physicists in Medicine
                                    (AAPM) Research Committee Task Group 268 recommends to report in Monte Carlo
                                    Radiation Transport Studies (Sechopoulos et al 2018).

                                    The microscopic simulations used a spherical nucleus of 9.65 μm in diameter, composed
                                    of liquid water and filled with a fractal pattern of explicit DNA structure. This nucleus
                                    size was chosen to maintain consistency with the original MGM and the original DNA
                                    damage simulations with TOPAS-nBio utilized as the source to feed the MGM (Zhu et al
                                    2020, Bertolet et al 2023). Nucleotides form a double-helix structure, encircling histones to




Author Manuscript
                                    create nucleosomes, each measuring 5.7 nm in length. These nucleosomes then organize into
                                    120-nm straight chromatin fibers, arranged in a three-dimensional pattern along the Hilbert
                                    curve. These fibers fill cubes measuring 0.3 mm on each side, with each cube containing
                                    approximately 0.42 million base pairs (Mbp) of DNA. This arrangement repetitively fills the
                                    volume within a sphere measuring 9.65 μm in diameter, simulating the cell nucleus. The
                                    quantification of DNA damage is calculated by accounting for the direct damage induced
                                    by radiation and the indirect damage induced by the subsequent chemical stage of the
                                    interaction between radiation and tissue using the same approach as in previous studies
                                    (Bertolet et al 2023).

                                    In the TOPAS-MGM simulations, the geometry consists of a single cell composed of two
                                    concentric spheres. To mimic TOPAS-nBio simulations, the inner sphere, representing the




Author Manuscript
                                    nucleus, has a diameter of 9.65 μm, while the outer sphere has a diameter of 12.0 μm.
                                    Unlike the microscopic scenario, where specific DNA structures are modeled, the entire cell
                                    is assumed to be composed of water. DNA damage is estimated by considering only the
                                    tracks that cross the nucleus (inner sphere).

                                    Tracks of both proton and α-particles traversing the cell nucleus uniformly across its
                                    projection were simulated with TOPAS-MGM and TOPAS-nBio. In both cases, the same
                                    source parameters were considered, varying the initial energy of the particles from 0.5 to


                                       Phys Med Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2026 February 14.
                    Onecha et al.                                                                                            Page 6


                                    100 MeV. The number of simulated particles was set in every case to deposit 10 Gy in the




Author Manuscript
                                    nucleus, which is high enough to ensure representative statistics of therapeutic applications.

                                    Results from both models were compared by means of DNA damage to crosscheck TOPAS-
                                    MGM. Induced number of MDS per track and complexity distributions were calculated for
                                    every energy and model. From this information, we computed the average MDS per track,
                                    the average weighted complexity (weighting its complexity by its own value), and their
                                    respective errors.

                       Sensitivity Analysis of Different Radiation Techniques
                                    Simulations using TOPAS-MGM were performed to study the induced DNA damage using
                                    different radiation techniques on a macroscopic scale. Using different configurations and
                                    distributions of cells, we performed three different studies, considering external particle
                                    therapy with protons and helium ions and RPT with α-emitters. In particle therapy, the




Author Manuscript
                                    source is an external beam that, in principle, covers the target uniformly. However, RPT
                                    involves the use of radioligands (molecular carriers labeled with radioactive isotopes), which
                                    specifically bind to tumor cells (St. James et al 2021, Sgouros et al 2020, O’Donoghue et al
                                    2022).

                                    1. Particle therapy sensitivity analysis for monoenergetic beams. An in-vitro
                                    cell culture-like geometry was used for this study, comprising 6000 cells plated in an
                                    adherent monolayer randomly distributed over an area of 5 × 5 × 0.05 cm3. This monolayer
                                    of cells was placed at the bottom of a larger water box measuring 5.1 × 5.1 × 0.5 cm3.
                                    This geometry was used to compute the induced DNA damage by monoenergetic proton and
                                    helium ion beams (Figure 2.a), with parallel cylindrical cells placed along the beam path in
                                    depth. We performed independent simulations covering several energies ranging from 1 to




Author Manuscript
                                    100 MeV for protons and Helium ions in 50 uniform steps in LET depositing 1 Gy in every
                                    case. These energy ranges were chosen to ensure LET overlap between low-energy protons
                                    and high-energy helium ions.

                                    2. Brag Peak sensitivity analysis. We calculated the induced DNA damage as a
                                    function of depth for a 170 MeV proton and a 135 MeV/u helium beam. To achieve this,
                                    we considered a water box measuring 10×10×40 cm3, containing 450 of the previously
                                    mentioned monolayers, each with 6000 cells placed every 0.5 mm along the beam
                                    direction. This setup accumulated a total of 2.7 million cells in the simulation. A schematic
                                    representation of this geometry is shown in Figure 1.b. The number of particles simulated
                                    was set to deposit 1 Gy at the entrance of the beam in the water phantom.




Author Manuscript
                                    3. RPT sensitivity analysis. The same in-vitro cell culture-like geometry was applied
                                    to mimic cells in experiments surrounded by the medium in which the radioligands were
                                    introduced. DNA damage across the cells was calculated considering two alpha emitters,
                                    225Ac and 211At, in two different settings. 1) Radioisotopes homogeneously distributed

                                    within the geometry (free in the medium), and 2) Radioisotopes bound to cell membranes.
                                    225Ac was chosen due to its relevance in RPT as their chemical properties are similar to

                                    other radiometals, such as the broadly utilized beta emitter 177Lu, and can be chelated to



                                       Phys Med Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2026 February 14.
                    Onecha et al.                                                                                           Page 7


                                    similar compounds (Thiele and Wilson 2018). 211At is another potential candidate for RPT




Author Manuscript
                                    with very different physical and chemical properties, such as its short half-life (roughly 6
                                    hours) and its ability as a radiohalogen to covalently link to small molecule drugs (Makvandi
                                    et al 2022). In both cases, the number of decays were chosen for each isotope to deposit 1
                                    Gy in the monolayer. A schematic representation of the RPT simulation is shown in Figure
                                    2.c.

                                    The output of the simulations in each of the three scenarios is the number of MDS per cell
                                    and its complexity. The output was analyzed to compute MDS and complexity frequency
                                    histograms and curves representing the average MDS and their complexity as a function of
                                    the LET of the initial particle and depth for the monoenergetic and Bragg peak analysis,
                                    respectively. Although the MDS distributions are not strictly Gaussian in every case, the Full
                                    Width at Half Maximum (FWHM) was used as a practical metric to quantify their spread.




Author Manuscript
                       Results
                       Cross-verification with TOPAS-nBio
                                    Figure 3 shows the results on Mean MDS per track and Weighted Mean Complexity
                                    as a function of yF obtained from both TOPAS-nBio and TOPAS-MGM. TOPAS-MGM
                                    predictions on the number of MDS align with TOPAS-nBio for protons with yF below 30
                                    keV/μm (1.0 MeV) and for α-particles with yF below 200 keV/μm (0.25 MeV/u). These
                                    energies correspond to ranges of 8.869 μm for protons and 5.931 μm for helium ions,
                                    shorter than the nuclear diameter (9.65 μm), meaning some particles stop inside the nucleus
                                    (stoppers). A similar trend is observed for complexities in Figure 3.b, where significant
                                    deviations are only observed for energies below 0.5 MeV (40 keV/μm) protons and 0.5
                                    MeV/u (150 keV/μm) helium ions. Despite the discrepancies at low-energy particles, results




Author Manuscript
                                    show the reliability of the model in calculating induced DNA damage using condensed-
                                    history simulations instead of the track-structure simulations from Geant4-DNA physics.
                                    Table 1 shows how the use of condensed-history physics models involves a simulation
                                    acceleration by a factor of up to 78,000 for protons and 243,000 for α-particles with
                                    respect to the analog simulations in TOPAS-nBio, representing a significant improvement
                                    in computational efficiency compared to previous methods. Every MDS per track and
                                    complexity frequency histograms used to calculate Figure 3 are shown in the supplementary
                                    material.

                       Particle Therapy – Proton and helium beams
                                    We calculated the number of induced MDS by protons and helium ion beams in individual
                                    cells within cell culture-like geometries, resulting in frequency histograms for the number




Author Manuscript
                                    of MDS and their complexity. Figure 4.a showcases two examples: a 20 MeV proton beam
                                    and a 5 MeV/u helium beam. The induced MDS followed a relatively narrow distribution
                                    centered around 30 MDS/Gy/Gbp for proton beams, with a FWHM close to 14. In contrast,
                                    for the 5 MeV/u helium beam, the induced MDS in cells follows a broader distribution
                                    centered around 20 MDS/Gy/Gbp, with cells ranging from 0 to 42 MDS/Gy/Gbp.




                                       Phys Med Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2026 February 14.
                    Onecha et al.                                                                                             Page 8


                                    We calculated average values and the standard deviation for the number of MDS and their




Author Manuscript
                                    complexity across all the previously indicated energies. The correlation between MDS and
                                    average complexity with LET for both proton and helium beams is illustrated in Figures 4.b
                                    and 4.c, respectively. Figure 4.b also includes experimental data from electrophoresis assays
                                    reporting early DNA damage in terms of DSB/Gy/Gbp (Frankenberg et al 1999, Belli et al
                                    2000, 2001, Hoglund et al 2000, Campa et al 2005, Yokota et al 2007, Esposito et al 2006).
                                    A large discrepancy is observed between simulated and experimental data, particularly for
                                    helium ions, when no corrections are applied. However, as reported by Sakata et al (Sakata
                                    et al 2019), this mismatch is primarily due to the experimental limitation in detecting
                                    DNA fragments smaller than 5–15 kbp. When these small fragments are excluded from
                                    the simulations, the “corrected” results shown in Figure 4b align more closely with the
                                    experimental data. Related to the simulated results, the lines represent the mean values,
                                    and the shaded areas represent one standard deviation. Given the higher LET of low-energy




Author Manuscript
                                    helium ions, the maximum MDS yield and average complexity reach values close to 17.5
                                    MDS/Gy/Gbp and 4.5, respectively, compared to 10.5 MDS/Gy/Gbp and 3.1 for protons.

                                    Figure 4b also illustrates that the standard deviation of the MDS distribution correlates with
                                    LET. In this context, the standard deviation reflects how broad the distribution of induced
                                    MDS is across cells when delivering an average dose of 1 Gy. As LET increases, fewer
                                    particles are required to deposit the same dose, resulting in more MDS per particle and,
                                    consequently, broader distributions.

                                    Figure 5 further shows the evolution of the MDS distribution as LET increases (i.e., as
                                    energy decreases). For protons, the FWHM remains close to 2.4 for 10, 52, and 150 MeV,
                                    but increases substantially to 6.7 for 1 MeV. Helium ions show a similar FWHM close to
                                    2.4 at high energies (52 and 150 MeV), which rises to 6.1 and 23.9 for 16 and 2 MeV,




Author Manuscript
                                    respectively. In addition, for high LET cases such as 2 MeV helium ions (162.5 keV/μm) the
                                    probability of cells not receiving any damage is non-negligible.

                       Particle Therapy – Bragg Peak
                                    DNA damage was calculated as a function of depth for a 170 MeV proton beam and a
                                    135 MeV/u helium beam (Figure 6). In these graphs, the number MDS and the dose were
                                    normalized to match at the entrance of the proton beam to highlight the relative differences
                                    at the Bragg peak. The ratio between MDS and dose shows a slight upward trend before
                                    the Bragg peak. Beyond this point, the ratio significantly increases. This effect is especially
                                    notable for alpha particles, where the ratio MDS/dose can reach up to 4.0, compared to 1.12
                                    for protons.




Author Manuscript
                                    In terms of complexity, the normalized MDS (fractions of MDS with complexity C = 2, 3,
                                    4, and ≥5) remain relatively constant until the proximities of the Bragg peak, where. protons
                                    showed a decrease of roughly 5% in MDS with complexity 2, which is mainly offset by
                                    an increase in MDS with complexities higher than 4. This effect is more pronounced with
                                    helium beams, where MDS with complexity 2 drops from 50% to 30%, while MDS with
                                    complexity 4 and those with complexities higher than 4 increase by 10%.




                                       Phys Med Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2026 February 14.
                    Onecha et al.                                                                                                  Page 9


                       RPT: α-targeted therapy




Author Manuscript
                                    Induced DNA damage in α-targeted therapy following radiation exposure of 1.0 Gy within
                                    the cells with 211At and 225Ac is presented in Figure 7. The average number of DSB induced
                                    per cell was approximately 70 in each scenario. However, the frequency histograms had
                                    significant variability among cells, with the number of induced DSB ranging from zero to
                                    200. The complexity distributions of the induced DNA damage showed an average value
                                    close to 4.5 in both scenarios.

                                    As 225Ac emits four alpha particles per decay, fewer histories were necessary to achieve a
                                    given dose compared to 211At, a single alpha-emitter. In particular, the number of simulated
                                    histories varies for 211At was 24,210 histories for the membrane-bound scenario and 1.6
                                    million for the medium-free scenario. For 225Ac, 8,940 and 181,818 histories were simulated
                                    for the membrane-bound and medium-free scenarios, respectively. The difference between




Author Manuscript
                                    the scenarios is related to the geometrical efficiency of being bound to the membrane.


                       Discussion
                                    This work proposes a novel method to estimate high-throughput DNA damage induced by
                                    protons and helium ions/a-particles by implementing the MGM within the TOPAS Monte
                                    Carlo framework. This method produces results similar to those obtained using TOPAS-nBio
                                    based on the GEANT4-DNA physics models with the advantage of employing condensed-
                                    history simulations through the G4EmLivermore or G4EmStandardPhysics models. As
                                    shown in this work, the computational time required to compute the DNA damage was
                                    reduced by a factor of about ~100,000. Furthermore, this approach not only calculates the
                                    number of MDS per cell but also their complexity distribution. TOPAS-MGM can facilitate
                                    the analysis and study of the response to radiation using DNA damage and its distribution




Author Manuscript
                                    across cells and space as the starting point. It is important to note that, although the MGM
                                    could be integrated into any Monte Carlo software capable of computing lineal energy
                                    within the nucleus, this step must be taken with caution. Differences in physics lists or
                                    particle transport algorithms may impact the calculated lineal energy and, consequently, the
                                    predicted DNA damage.

                                    The key contribution of this study is the ability to calculate DNA damage distributions in
                                    different macroscopic scenarios while accounting for microdosimetric heterogeneities, i.e.,
                                    non-uniform distributions of doses received per cell nucleus. This heterogeneity in DDI may
                                    play a significant role in the biological response at the cellular level (Baiocco et al 2022). As
                                    TOPAS-MGM can calculate DNA damage and complexity in macroscopic 3D volumes, our
                                    goal is to expand it for future particle therapy treatment planning using damage complexity




Author Manuscript
                                    statistics instead of traditional dose metrics, a similar concept to nanodosimetry (Rucinski et
                                    al 2021). While nanodosimetry characterizes ionization cluster sizes (Yang et al 2024, Mao
                                    et al 2024, Selva et al 2019, Conte et al 2018), TOPAS-MGM provides extra information
                                    by accounting for DNA damage complexity, considering direct damage and indirect damage
                                    from free radicals over an explicit DNA geometry arrangement.

                                    DNA damage in terms of the number of MDS and its complexity could be considered
                                    as the initial starting point for tumor control or normal tissue toxicities. Considering the


                                       Phys Med Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2026 February 14.
                    Onecha et al.                                                                                            Page 10


                                    assumption that tumors or tissues respond to radiation based on the induced DNA damage




Author Manuscript
                                    regardless of how it is generated (Mladenov et al 2013, Santivasi and Xia 2014), a DNA-
                                    based model might predict their response under different radiation exposure conditions since
                                    the number and complexity of MDS might inherently capture the variability in radiation
                                    effectiveness, accounting for factors such as particle type and the heterogeneous distribution
                                    of radiation in time and space. Nevertheless, we need to test the predictive power of these
                                    quantities. As a first step, the MGM should be expanded to include more ionizing radiation
                                    modalities used in the clinic. To accurately compare the radiosensitivity of tumors and
                                    tissues across different types of radiation in terms of DNA damage, it is necessary for
                                    MGM to include heavier ions, such as 12C or 16O, low- and high-energy electrons, and
                                    X-rays, which serve as the reference radiation in radiobiology. In addition, implementing
                                    the MGM within a treatment planning software is necessary to enable MDS and complexity
                                    comparisons with current tumor control and normal tissue toxicity models based on dose and




Author Manuscript
                                    RBE. At this stage, it is also essential to assess its computational feasibility at the patient
                                    scale. If not feasible, alternatives such as limiting the analysis to the tumor region could be
                                    considered.

                                    In this work, we observed that the number of damaged sites and their complexity increases
                                    with the LET of the particles in a similar trend as reported before (Bertolet et al 2022,
                                    Ramos-Méndez et al 2021, Hada and Georgakilas 2008, Nikitaki et al 2022). However,
                                    TOPAS-MGM might not accurately reproduce the induced number of MDS and its
                                    complexity when protons and α-particles stop within the nucleus or when particles have
                                    very low energy. In both cases, the common factor is that the continuous slowing-down
                                    approximation (CSDA) used in condensed-history approaches— which assumes continuous
                                    energy loss and neglects significant energy-loss fluctuations— is not valid due to the
                                    significant variation in LET along the track inside the nucleus. In addition, stoppers are a




Author Manuscript
                                    limitation of the yF, as it is normalized by the mean chord length assuming all particles cross
                                    the nuclei. Consequently, combining condensed-history simulations and the MGM based
                                    on yF might not be the most suitable approach for very low-energy particles. However, the
                                    use of condensed-history approaches might have limited impact when applied to treatment
                                    planning, as it would only affect those voxels at the end of the particle range. Even within
                                    those voxels, which are typically on the order of centimeters, only a small region would be
                                    influenced since this effect is relevant only in the last few microns of the particle track.

                                    TOPAS-MGM DDI predictions overestimate electrophoresis experimental data, especially
                                    at LETs higher than 50 keV/μm. This discrepancy is partially corrected when simulated
                                    DNA fragments shorter than 5 kbp are excluded, consistent with the experimental limitation
                                    of detecting small DNA fragments in electrophoresis experiments, as previously reported




Author Manuscript
                                    by Sakata et al (Sakata et al 2019). In addition, further validation is needed to increase
                                    confidence in the results on the spatial distribution of damage across cells. One approach
                                    for its validation could be measuring the number of damage sites using immunofluorescence
                                    microscopy, which can detect markers such as γ-H2AX, 53BP1, and phosphor-NBS1 to
                                    quantify the number of repair foci in cells (Oike et al 2023, Gruel et al 2016, Du et al 2011,
                                    Antonelli et al 2015), as foci are associated with DSB. These studies and others calculated
                                    the average foci per cell induced by X-rays, electrons, and heavy ions, but the distribution
                                    across cells is typically not reported. Further dedicated experiments are therefore required to

                                       Phys Med Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2026 February 14.
                    Onecha et al.                                                                                          Page 11


                                    validate relative DNA damage predictions per cell across radiation types from Monte Carlo




Author Manuscript
                                    simulations.

                                    The model presented in this work is at its initial concept stage. The MGM is based on a
                                    the geometry available in TOPAS-nBio, assuming a 9.65-μm diameter water sphere filled
                                    with a fractal pattern for DNA, and several fundamental assumptions need to be expanded
                                    before its extrapolation to other scenarios, such as different cell sizes. For example, the
                                    genetic material size and shape vary not only across cell lines but also within cells of
                                    the same type, and it may affect the DNA damage provided by the simulations. In this
                                    sense, heterochromatin and euchromatin regions have different compaction levels, which
                                    might affect the calculated induced damage in those regions, besides their impact on DNA
                                    repair (Han et al 2016). Additionally, in the MGM work, damage sites were defined using
                                    a maximum sequence of 10 intact base-pairs to separate sites, which tends to capture
                                    very close damage. However, this value is based on previous works, and it is possible




Author Manuscript
                                    that more distant damage could potentially combine during genome replication. If so, this
                                    would call for distinct definitions of complexity depending on the ability of damages to act
                                    collaboratively in the DDR, which resembles the concept of domain in the microdosimetric
                                    kinetic model. Interestingly, different definitions of complexity depending on this value
                                    would represent a transition palette between nanodosimetry and microdosimetry.

                                    Another important factor to consider for DDI, particularly when considering patient CT
                                    geometries, is the material composition. Each voxel is assigned to a Hounsfield Unit and
                                    density values. While material composition might influence the direct DNA damage caused
                                    by radiation, as long as the density remains close to 1.0 g/cm3, which is the case for
                                    most tumors, the results are expected to be similar. In contrast, indirect DNA damage,
                                    driven by the chemical reactions of reactive oxygen species (ROS), may vary substantially




Author Manuscript
                                    with material composition. The chemical differences in DDI cannot be assessed with
                                    TOPAS-nBio as it only considers chemical reactions in water. However, since the MGM
                                    predicts direct and indirect damage separately, we could adapt this model to other material
                                    compositions if the role of scavengers in those materials, relative to water, is known, by
                                    reducing or increasing its contribution to the DDI.

                                    Cellular oxygenation also has an important role in DDI. It is well known that the
                                    concentration of oxygen in the cellular environment directly impacts the number of induced
                                    DSBs, as oxygen plays a key role in the recombination of free radicals and thus in DNA
                                    damage caused by indirect (chemical) mechanisms (Ramos-Méndez et al 2021). Lowering
                                    oxygen concentration reduces the number of DSBs, which in turn decreases the biological
                                    effectiveness of the dose by up to a factor of three under hypoxic conditions (Sunada et al




Author Manuscript
                                    2017, Barilla and Lokajíček 2000, Tsai et al 2015). Incorporating oxygen concentration into
                                    future versions of the MGM would allow modeling of heterogeneous responses across tumor
                                    regions with varying levels of oxygenation. This oxygen-DDI analysis can be quantified
                                    with TOPAS-nBio in water, and then extrapolate it to other materials , provided that the
                                    relative effect of scavengers between them is known. Additionally, there is no consideration
                                    of the different extracellular matrices in tissues. The extracellular matrix plays a crucial
                                    role in modulating the mechanical and chemical environment around cells, potentially
                                    influencing the propagation of radiation, energy deposition, and the generation of reactive


                                       Phys Med Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2026 February 14.
                    Onecha et al.                                                                                                                Page 12


                                      species, all of which can significantly affect DNA damage outcomes (Deng et al 2020,




Author Manuscript
                                      Martins et al 2021). The impact of all these limitations warrants further investigation before
                                      translating this concept to clinical use.

                                      Despite the current limitations regarding cell size, cell type, or DNA configuration, TOPAS-
                                      MGM can be used to characterize the relative differences across radiation types based on
                                      DDI. Unlike dose, whose biological effect depends on the radiation delivering it, DNA
                                      damage represents a quantity that is transversal to any radiation type. This means that, once
                                      DDI is calculated, a single radiobiological model could describe the response of a specific
                                      cell type to any radiation, making DDI an ideal starting point for radiobiological models.
                                      In such DNA-based models, DDI from TOPAS-MGM would be the common input, while
                                      dedicated parameters would capture the biological variability, such as differences in DNA
                                      structure or repair pathways, across cell types or tissues. The more detailed and realistic
                                      the simulations and geometry are, the more information these potential DNA-based models




Author Manuscript
                                      could incorporate, reducing biological uncertainties when explaining relative differences
                                      across radiations and cells. Therefore, the refinement of DDI characterization and the
                                      development of such models can progress in parallel, mutually reinforcing each other toward
                                      more reliable radiobiological frameworks.


                       Conclusion
                                      The implementation of the Microdosimetric Gamma Model (MGM) within the TOPAS
                                      framework enables the estimation of DNA damage induced by protons and alpha particles in
                                      large-scale scenarios, ranging from in-vitro cell-like geometries to patient-sized geometries.
                                      The DNA damage and complexity distributions obtained with this model were cross-verified
                                      with TOPAS-nBio simulations, and predictions were consistent. TOPAS-MGM enables the




Author Manuscript
                                      study of the DDI in macroscopic scenarios, ranging from simple cases such as individual
                                      cells, to geometries that mimic cell cultures, and even to the evaluation of DNA damage
                                      along clinical-energy proton or α-particle beams.


                       Supplementary Material
                                      Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.


                       Disclosures and funding
                                      This work was funded by the NIH/NCI award no. R00CA267560: “Radiation dosimetry for α-particle
                                      radiopharmaceutical therapy and application to pediatric neuroblastoma.” In part funded by NIH/NCI award
                                      R01CA187003: ‘‘TOPAS-nBio: a Monte Carlo tool for radiation biology research.”




Author Manuscript
                       Financial Support:
                                      R00CA267560: “Radiation dosimetry for α-particle radiopharmaceutical therapy and application to pediatric
                                      neuroblastoma”. In part funded by NIH/NCI award R01CA187003: ‘‘TOPAS-nBio: a Monte Carlo tool for
                                      radiation biology research”. In part funded by NIH/NCI award P01CA261669: “Integrating patient-specific clinical
                                      and biological factors towards individualizing utilization of proton and photon radiation therapy”.




                                            Phys Med Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2026 February 14.
                    Onecha et al.                                                                                                  Page 13


                       References




Author Manuscript
                                    Antonelli F, Campa A, Esposito G, Giardullo P, Belli M, Dini V, Meschini S, Simone G, Sorrentino E,
                                      Gerardi S, Cirrone G a. P and Tabocchini MA 2015 Induction and Repair of DNA DSB as Revealed
                                      by H2AX Phosphorylation Foci in Human Fibroblasts Exposed to Low- and High-LET Radiation:
                                      Relationship with Early and Delayed Reproductive Cell Death rare 183 417–31
                                    Baiocco G, Bartzsch S, Conte V, Friedrich T, Jakob B, Tartas A, Villagrasa C and Prise KM 2022
                                      A matter of space: how the spatial heterogeneity in energy deposition determines the biological
                                      outcome of radiation exposure Radiat Environ Biophys 61 545–59 [PubMed: 36220965]
                                    Barilla J and Lokajíček M 2000 The Role of Oxygen in DNA Damage by Ionizing Particles Journal of
                                      Theoretical Biology 207 405–14 [PubMed: 11082309]
                                    Belli M, Cherubini R, Dalla Vecchia M, Dini V, Esposito G, Moschini G, Sapora O, Signoretti C,
                                      Simone G, Sorrentino E and Tabocchini MA 2001 DNA Fragmentation in mammalian cells exposed
                                      to various light ions Advances in Space Research 27 393–9 [PubMed: 11642301]
                                    Belli M, Cherubini R, Vecchia MD, Dini V, Moschini G, Signoretti C, Simone G, Tabocchini MA and
                                      Tiveron P 2000 DNA DSB induction and rejoining in V79 cells irradiated with light ions: a constant




Author Manuscript
                                      field gel electrophoresis study. International Journal of Radiation Biology 76 1095–104 [PubMed:
                                      10947122]
                                    Bertolet A, Chamseddine I, Paganetti H and Schuemann J 2023 The complexity of DNA damage by
                                      radiation follows a Gamma distribution: insights from the Microdosimetric Gamma Model Frontiers
                                      in Oncology 13 Online: https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fonc.2023.1196502
                                    Bertolet A, Ramos-Méndez J, McNamara A, Yoo D, Ingram S, Henthorn N, Warmenhoven J-W,
                                      Faddegon B, Merchant M, McMahon SJ, Paganetti H and Schuemann J 2022 Impact of DNA
                                      Geometry and Scoring on Monte Carlo Track-Structure Simulations of Initial Radiation-Induced
                                      Damage Radiat Res 198 207–20 [PubMed: 35767729]
                                    Campa A, Ballarini F, Belli M, Cherubini R, Dini V, Esposito G, Friedland W, Gerardi S, Molinelli S,
                                      Ottolenghi A, Paretzke H, Simone G and Tabocchini MA 2005 DNA DSB induced in human cells
                                      by charged particles and gamma rays: Experimental results and theoretical approaches. International
                                      Journal of Radiation Biology 81 841–54 [PubMed: 16484153]
                                    Chatzipapas K, Dordevic M, Zivkovic S, Tran NH, Lampe N, Sakata D, Petrovic I, Ristic-Fira A, Shin
                                      W-G, Zein S, Brown JMC, Kyriakou I, Emfietzoglou D, Guatelli S and Incerti S 2023 Geant4-DNA




Author Manuscript
                                      simulation of human cancer cells irradiation with helium ion beams Physica Medica 112 102613
                                      [PubMed: 37356419]
                                    Choi J and Kang JO 2012 Basics of particle therapy II: relative biological effectiveness Radiation
                                        Oncol J 30 1–13
                                    Conte V, Selva A, Colautti P, Hilgers G, Rabus H, Bantsar A, Pietrzak M and Pszona S 2018
                                        NANODOSIMETRY: TOWARDS A NEW CONCEPT OF RADIATION QUALITY Radiation
                                        Protection Dosimetry 180 150–6 [PubMed: 29036364]
                                    Deng M, Lin J, Nowsheen S, Liu T, Zhao Y, Villalta PW, Sicard D, Tschumperlin DJ, Lee S, Kim
                                        J and Lou Z 2020 Extracellular matrix stiffness determines DNA repair efficiency and cellular
                                        sensitivity to genotoxic agents Sci Adv 6 eabb2630 [PubMed: 32917705]
                                    Du G, Drexler GA, Friedland W, Greubel C, Hable V, Krücken R, Kugler A, Tonelli L, Friedl AA
                                        and Dollinger G 2011 Spatial Dynamics of DNA Damage Response Protein Foci along the Ion
                                        Trajectory of High-LET Particles rare 176 706–15
                                    Esposito G, Belli M, Campa A, Cherubini R, Cuttone G, Dini V, Furusawa Y, Gerardi S, Simone




Author Manuscript
                                        G, Sorrentino E and Tabocchini MA 2006 DNA fragments induction in human fibroblasts by
                                        radiations of different qualities Radiation Protection Dosimetry 122 166–8 [PubMed: 17142820]
                                    Faddegon B, Ramos-Méndez J, Schuemann J, McNamara A, Shin J, Perl J and Paganetti H 2020 The
                                        TOPAS tool for particle simulation, a Monte Carlo simulation tool for physics, biology and clinical
                                        research Physica Medica 72 114–21 [PubMed: 32247964]
                                    Frankenberg D, Brede HJ, Schrewe UJ, Steinmetz C, Frankenberg-Schwager M, Kasten G and Pralle
                                        E 1999 Induction of DNA Double-Strand Breaks by 1 H and 4 He Ions in Primary Human Skin
                                        Fibroblasts in the LET Range of 8 to 124 keV/?m Radiation Research 151 540–9 [PubMed:
                                        10319727]



                                       Phys Med Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2026 February 14.
                    Onecha et al.                                                                                                   Page 14


                                    Friedland W, Dingfelder M, Kundrát P and Jacob P 2011 Track structures, DNA targets and
                                        radiation effects in the biophysical Monte Carlo simulation code PARTRAC Mutation Research/




Author Manuscript
                                        Fundamental and Molecular Mechanisms of Mutagenesis 711 28–40 [PubMed: 21281649]
                                    Goodhead DT and Weinfeld M 2024 Clustered DNA Damage and its Complexity: Tracking the
                                        History rare 202 385–407
                                    Gruel G, Villagrasa C, Voisin P, Clairand I, Benderitter M, Bottollier-Depois J-F and Barquinero JF
                                        2016 Cell to Cell Variability of Radiation-Induced Foci: Relation between Observed Damage and
                                        Energy Deposition PLoS One 11 e0145786 [PubMed: 26727594]
                                    Hada M and Georgakilas AG 2008 Formation of clustered DNA damage after high-LET irradiation: a
                                        review J Radiat Res 49 203–10 [PubMed: 18413977]
                                    Han C, Srivastava AK, Cui T, Wang Q-E and Wani AA 2016 Differential DNA lesion formation and
                                        repair in heterochromatin and euchromatin Carcinogenesis 37 129–38 [PubMed: 26717995]
                                    Heemskerk T, Groenendijk C, Rovituso M, van der Wal E, van Burik W, Chatzipapas K, Lathouwers
                                        D, Kanaar R, Brown JMC and Essers J 2025 Position in proton Bragg curve influences DNA
                                        damage complexity and survival in head and neck cancer cells Clinical and Translational Radiation
                                        Oncology 51 100908 [PubMed: 39877299]




Author Manuscript
                                    Helm A and Fournier C 2023 High-LET charged particles: radiobiology and application for new
                                        approaches in radiotherapy Strahlenther Onkol 199 1225–41 [PubMed: 37872399]
                                    Hoglund E, Blomquist E, Carlsson J and Stenerlow B 2000 DNA damage induced by radiation of
                                        different linear energy transfer: initial fragmentation. International Journal of Radiation Biology
                                        76 539–47 [PubMed: 10815635]
                                    Huang R-X and Zhou P-K 2020 DNA damage response signaling pathways and targets for
                                        radiotherapy sensitization in cancer Sig Transduct Target Ther 5 60
                                    Incerti S, Kyriakou I, Bernal MA, Bordage MC, Francis Z, Guatelli S, Ivanchenko V, Karamitros M,
                                        Lampe N, Lee SB, Meylan S, Min CH, Shin WG, Nieminen P, Sakata D, Tang N, Villagrasa C,
                                        Tran HN and Brown JMC 2018 Geant4-DNA example applications for track structure simulations
                                        in liquid water: A report from the Geant4-DNA Project Medical Physics 45 e722–39
                                    Ivanchenko V, Bagulya A, Bakr S, Bandieramonte M, Bernard D, Bordage M-C, Brown J, Burkhardt
                                        H, Dondero P, Elles S, Grichine V, Guatelli S, Hariri F, Howard A, Incerti S, Jun SY, Kadri O,
                                        Kyriakou I, Maire M, Mantero A, Novak M, Sawkey D, Semeniouk I, Sokolov A and Urban L
                                        2019 Progress of Geant4 electromagnetic physics developments and applications EPJ Web Conf.




Author Manuscript
                                        214 02046
                                    Jezkova L, Zadneprianetc M, Kulikova E, Smirnova E, Bulanova T, Depes D, Falkova I, Boreyko
                                        A, Krasavin E, Davidkova M, Kozubek S, Valentova O and Falk M 2018 Particles with similar
                                        LET values generate DNA breaks of different complexity and reparability: a high-resolution
                                        microscopy analysis of γH2AX/53BP1 foci Nanoscale 10 1162–79 [PubMed: 29271466]
                                    Karger CP and Peschke P 2017 RBE and related modeling in carbon-ion therapy Phys Med Biol 63
                                        01TR02
                                    Katugampola S, Wang J, Rosen A and Howell RW 2022 MIRD Pamphlet No. 27: MIRDcell V3, a
                                        Revised Software Tool for Multicellular Dosimetry and Bioeffect Modeling Journal of Nuclear
                                        Medicine 63 1441–9 [PubMed: 35145016]
                                    khodamoradi E, Hoseini-Ghahfarokhi M, Amini P, Motevaseli E, Shabeeb D, Musa AE, Najafi M and
                                        Farhood B 2020 Targets for protection and mitigation of radiation injury Cell Mol Life Sci 77
                                        3129–59 [PubMed: 32072238]
                                    Lim A, Andriotty M, Yusufaly T, Agasthya G, Lee B and Wang C 2023 A fast Monte Carlo




Author Manuscript
                                        cell-by-cell simulation for radiobiological effects in targeted radionuclide therapy using pre-
                                        calculated single-particle-track standard DNA damage data Front. Nucl. Med. 3 Online: https://
                                        www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fnume.2023.1284558
                                    Makvandi M, Samanta M, Martorano P, Lee H, Gitto SB, Patel K, Groff D, Pogoriler J, Martinez
                                        D, Riad A, Dabagian H, Zaleski M, Taghvaee T, Xu K, Lee JY, Hou C, Farrel A, Batra V,
                                        Carlin SD, Powell DJ, Mach RH, Pryma DA and Maris JM 2022 Pre-clinical investigation of
                                        astatine-211-parthanatine for high-risk neuroblastoma Commun Biol 5 1–9 [PubMed: 34987157]




                                       Phys Med Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2026 February 14.
                    Onecha et al.                                                                                                Page 15


                                    Mao H, Zhang H, Luo Y, Yang J, Liu Y, Zhang S, Chen W, Li Q and Dai Z 2024 Primary study of the
                                        relative and compound biological effectiveness model for boron neutron capture therapy based on




Author Manuscript
                                        nanodosimetry Medical Physics 51 3076–92 [PubMed: 38408025]
                                    Margis S, Magouni M, Kyriakou I, Georgakilas AG, Incerti S and Emfietzoglou D 2020
                                        Microdosimetric calculations of the direct DNA damage induced by low energy electrons using
                                        the Geant4-DNA Monte Carlo code Physics in Medicine and Biology 65 045007 [PubMed:
                                        31935692]
                                    Martins SG, Zilhão R, Thorsteinsdóttir S and Carlos AR 2021 Linking Oxidative Stress and DNA
                                        Damage to Changes in the Expression of Extracellular Matrix Components Front Genet 12 673002
                                        [PubMed: 34394183]
                                    McNamara AL, Schuemann J and Paganetti H 2015 A phenomenological relative biological
                                        effectiveness (RBE) model for proton therapy based on all published in vitro cell survival data
                                        Physics in Medicine and Biology 60 8399–416 [PubMed: 26459756]
                                    McNamara A, Willers H and Paganetti H 2020 Modelling variable proton relative biological
                                        effectiveness for treatment planning Br J Radiol 93 20190334 [PubMed: 31738081]
                                    Mladenov E, Magin S, Soni A and Iliakis G 2013 DNA double-strand break repair as determinant of




Author Manuscript
                                        cellular radiosensitivity to killing and target in radiation therapy Frontiers in Oncology 3 MAY
                                        1–18 [PubMed: 23373009]
                                    Mladenova V, Mladenov E, Chaudhary S, Stuschke M and Iliakis G 2022 The high toxicity
                                        of DSB-clusters modelling high-LET-DNA damage derives from inhibition of c-NHEJ
                                        and promotion of alt-EJ and SSA despite increases in HR Front. Cell Dev. Biol.
                                        10 Online: https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/cell-and-developmental-biology/articles/10.3389/
                                        fcell.2022.1016951/full
                                    Nakano T, Akamatsu K, Tsuda M, Tujimoto A, Hirayama R, Hiromoto T, Tamada T, Ide H and
                                        Shikazono N 2022 Formation of clustered DNA damage in vivo upon irradiation with ionizing
                                        radiation: Visualization and analysis with atomic force microscopy Proceedings of the National
                                        Academy of Sciences 119 e2119132119
                                    Nickoloff JA, Sharma N and Taylor L 2020 Clustered DNA double-strand breaks: Biological effects
                                        and relevance to cancer radiotherapy Genes 11
                                    Nikitaki Z, Velalopoulou A, Zanni V, Tremi I, Havaki S, Kokkoris M, Gorgoulis VG, Koumenis C and
                                        Georgakilas AG 2022 Key biological mechanisms involved in high-LET radiation therapies with a




Author Manuscript
                                        focus on DNA damage and repair Expert Rev Mol Med 24 e15 [PubMed: 35357290]
                                    O’Donoghue J, Zanzonico P, Humm J and Kesner A 2022 Dosimetry in Radiopharmaceutical Therapy
                                        Journal of Nuclear Medicine 63 1467–74 [PubMed: 36192334]
                                    Oeck S, Szymonowicz K, Wiel G, Krysztofiak A, Lambert J, Koska B, Iliakis G, Timmermann B
                                        and Jendrossek V 2018 Relating Linear Energy Transfer to the Formation and Resolution of DNA
                                        Repair Foci After Irradiation with Equal Doses of X-ray Photons, Plateau, or Bragg-Peak Protons
                                        Int J Mol Sci 19 3779 [PubMed: 30486506]
                                    Oike T, Kakoti S, Sakai M, Matsumura A, Ohno T and Shibata A 2023 Analysis of the relationship
                                        between LET, γH2AX foci volume and cell killing effect of carbon ions using high-resolution
                                        imaging technology Journal of Radiation Research 64 335–44 [PubMed: 36621883]
                                    Paganetti H 2022 Mechanisms and Review of Clinical Evidence of Variations in Relative Biological
                                        Effectiveness in Proton Therapy International Journal of Radiation Oncology*Biology*Physics
                                        112 222–36
                                    Paganetti H 2014 Relative biological effectiveness (RBE) values for proton beam therapy. Variations




Author Manuscript
                                        as a function of biological endpoint, dose, and linear energy transfer Physics in Medicine and
                                        Biology 59 R419–72 [PubMed: 25361443]
                                    Paganetti H, Niemierko A, Ancukiewicz M, Gerweck LE, Goitein M, Loeffler JS and Suit HD 2002
                                        Relative biological effectiveness (RBE) values for proton beam therapy International Journal of
                                        Radiation Oncology*Biology*Physics 53 407–21
                                    Perl J, Shin J, Schümann J, Faddegon B and Paganetti H 2012 TOPAS: An innovative proton Monte
                                        Carlo platform for research and clinical applications Medical Physics 39 6818–37 [PubMed:
                                        23127075]




                                       Phys Med Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2026 February 14.
                    Onecha et al.                                                                                                 Page 16


                                    Ramos-Méndez J, LaVerne J, Domínguez-Kondo N, Milligan J, Štěpán V, Stefanová K, Perrot Y,
                                         Villagrasa C, Shin W-G, Incerti S, McNamara A, Paganetti H, Perl J, Schuemann J and Faddegon




Author Manuscript
                                         B 2021 TOPAS-nBio validation for simulating water radiolysis and DNA damage under Low-LET
                                         irradiation Phys Med Biol 66 10.1088/1361-6560/ac1f39
                                    Roobol SJ, van den Bent I, van Cappellen W A, Abraham TE, Paul MW, Kanaar R, Houtsmuller AB,
                                         van Gent D C and Essers J 2020 Comparison of High- and Low-LET Radiation-Induced DNA
                                         Double-Strand Break Processing in Living Cells Int J Mol Sci 21 6602 [PubMed: 32917044]
                                    Rucinski A, Biernacka A and Schulte R 2021 Applications of Nanodosimetry in Particle Therapy
                                         Planning and Beyond Phys Med Biol 66 10.1088/1361-6560/ac35f1
                                    Sakata D, Lampe N, Karamitros M, Kyriakou I, Belov O, Bernal MA, Bolst D, Bordage M-C, Breton
                                         V, Brown JMC, Francis Z, Ivanchenko V, Meylan S, Murakami K, Okada S, Petrovic I, Ristic-Fira
                                         A, Santin G, Sarramia D, Sasaki T, Shin W-G, Tang N, Tran HN, Villagrasa C, Emfietzoglou D,
                                         Nieminen P, Guatelli S and Incerti S 2019 Evaluation of early radiation DNA damage in a fractal
                                         cell nucleus model using Geant4-DNA Physica Medica 62 152–7 [PubMed: 31109825]
                                    Santivasi WL and Xia F 2014 Ionizing Radiation-Induced DNA Damage, Response, and Repair
                                         Antioxidants & Redox Signaling 21 251–9 [PubMed: 24180216]




Author Manuscript
                                    Schuemann J, McNamara AL, Ramos-Méndez J, Perl J, Held KD, Paganetti H, Incerti S and Faddegon
                                         B 2018a TOPAS-nBio: An Extension to the TOPAS Simulation Toolkit for Cellular and Sub-
                                         cellular Radiobiology rare 191 125–38
                                    Schuemann J, McNamara AL, Warmenhoven JW, Henthorn NT, Kirkby KJ, Merchant MJ, Ingram S,
                                         Paganetti H, Held KD, Ramos-Mendez J, Faddegon B, Perl J, Goodhead DT, Plante I, Rabus H,
                                         Nettelbeck H, Friedland W, Kundrát P, Ottolenghi A, Baiocco G, Barbieri S, Dingfelder M, Incerti
                                         S, Villagrasa C, Bueno M, Bernal MA, Guatelli S, Sakata D, Brown JMC, Francis Z, Kyriakou
                                         I, Lampe N, Ballarini F, Carante MP, Davídková M, Štěpán V, Jia X, Cucinotta FA, Schulte R,
                                         Stewart RD, Carlson DJ, Galer S, Kuncic Z, Lacombe S, Milligan J, Cho SH, Sawakuchi G,
                                         Inaniwa T, Sato T, Li W, Solov’yov AV, Surdutovich E, Durante M, Prise KM and McMahon
                                         SJ 2018b A New Standard DNA Damage (SDD) Data Format Radiation Research 191 76–92
                                         [PubMed: 30407901]
                                    Sechopoulos I, Rogers DWO, Bazalova-Carter M, Bolch WE, Heath EC, McNitt-Gray MF, Sempau
                                         J and Williamson JF 2018 RECORDS: improved Reporting of montE CarlO RaDiation transport
                                         Studies: Report of the AAPM Research Committee Task Group 268 Medical Physics 45 e1–5




Author Manuscript
                                         [PubMed: 29178605]
                                    Selva A, De Nadal V, Cherubini R, Colautti P and Conte V 2019 TOWARDS THE USE OF
                                         NANODOSIMETRY TO PREDICT CELL SURVIVAL Radiation Protection Dosimetry 183 192–
                                         6 [PubMed: 30566675]
                                    Sgouros G, Bodei L, McDevitt MR and Nedrow JR 2020 Radiopharmaceutical therapy in cancer:
                                         clinical advances and challenges Nat Rev Drug Discov 19 589–608 [PubMed: 32728208]
                                    Sia J, Szmyd R, Hau E and Gee HE 2020 Molecular Mechanisms of Radiation-Induced Cancer Cell
                                         Death: A Primer Front. Cell Dev. Biol. 8 41 [PubMed: 32117972]
                                    St. James S, Bednarz B, Benedict S, Buchsbaum JC, Dewaraja Y, Frey E, Hobbs R, Grudzinski J,
                                         Roncali E, Sgouros G, Capala J and Xiao Y 2021 Current Status of Radiopharmaceutical Therapy
                                         International Journal of Radiation Oncology*Biology*Physics 109 891–901
                                    Stewart RD, Yu VK, Georgakilas AG, Koumenis C, Park JH and Carlson DJ 2011 Effects of radiation
                                         quality and oxygen on clustered DNA lesions and cell death Radiat Res 176 587–602 [PubMed:
                                         21823972]




Author Manuscript
                                    Sunada S, Hirakawa H, Fujimori A, Uesaka M and Okayasu R 2017 Oxygen Enhancement Ratio in
                                         Radiation-Induced Initial DSBs by an Optimized Flow Cytometry-based Gamma-H2AX Analysis
                                         in A549 Human Cancer Cells rare 188 671–4
                                    Tamborino G, Perrot Y, De Saint-Hubert M, Struelens L, Nonnekens J, Jong MD, Konijnenberg
                                         MW and Villagrasa C 2022 Modeling Early Radiation DNA Damage Occurring During 177Lu-
                                         DOTATATE Radionuclide Therapy J Nucl Med 63 761–9 [PubMed: 34503959]
                                    Thiele NA and Wilson JJ 2018 Actinium-225 for Targeted α Therapy: Coordination Chemistry and
                                         Current Chelation Approaches Cancer Biotherapy and Radiopharmaceuticals 33 336–48 [PubMed:
                                         29889562]



                                       Phys Med Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2026 February 14.
                    Onecha et al.                                                                                                Page 17


                                    Tian L, Hahn C and Lühr A 2022 An ion-independent phenomenological relative biological
                                        effectiveness (RBE) model for proton therapy Radiother Oncol 174 69–76 [PubMed: 35803365]




Author Manuscript
                                    Tsai J-Y, Chen F-H, Hsieh T-Y and Hsiao Y-Y 2015 Effects of indirect actions and oxygen on relative
                                        biological effectiveness: estimate of DSB induction and conversion induced by gamma rays and
                                        helium ions J Radiat Res 56 691–9 [PubMed: 25902742]
                                    Underwood TSA, McNamara AL, Appelt A, Haviland JS, Sørensen BS and Troost EGC 2022 A
                                        systematic review of clinical studies on variable proton Relative Biological Effectiveness (RBE)
                                        Radiotherapy and Oncology 175 79–92 [PubMed: 35988776]
                                    Underwood TS and McMahon SJ 2019 Proton relative biological effectiveness (RBE): a multiscale
                                        problem Br J Radiol 92 20180004 [PubMed: 29975153]
                                    Ward JF 1985 Biochemistry of DNA lesions Radiat Res Suppl 8 S103–111 [PubMed: 3867077]
                                    Wilkinson B, Hill MA and Parsons JL 2023 The Cellular Response to Complex DNA Damage Induced
                                        by Ionising Radiation Int J Mol Sci 24 4920 [PubMed: 36902352]
                                    Yang J, Liu X, Zhang H, Dai Z, He P, Ma Y, Shen G, Chen W and Li Q 2024 Nanodosimetric
                                        quantity-weighted dose optimization for carbon-ion treatment planning Phys Eng Sci Med 47
                                        703–15 [PubMed: 38416372]




Author Manuscript
                                    Yokota Y, Yamada S, Hase Y, Shikazono N, Narumi I, Tanaka A and Inoue M 2007 Initial Yields of
                                        DNA Double-Strand Breaks and DNA Fragmentation Patterns Depend on Linear Energy Transfer
                                        in Tobacco BY-2 Protoplasts Irradiated with Helium, Carbon and Neon Ions rare 167 94–101
                                    Zhu H, McNamara AL, Ramos-Mendez J, McMahon SJ, Henthorn NT, Faddegon B, Held KD,
                                        Perl J, Li J, Paganetti H and Schuemann J 2020 A parameter sensitivity study for simulating
                                        DNA damage after proton irradiation using TOPAS-nBio Phys Med Biol 65 085015 [PubMed:
                                        32101803]




Author Manuscript




Author Manuscript




                                       Phys Med Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2026 February 14.
                    Onecha et al.                                                                                          Page 18




Author Manuscript




Author Manuscript




                                    Figure 1.




Author Manuscript
                                    Comparison of energy deposition in the nucleus between the track-structure and condensed-
                                    history approaches. (A) In track-structure MC, every secondary electron is explicitly tracked,
                                    leading to energy deposition both inside and outside the nucleus. The fraction of energy
                                    deposited outside depends on the track length and electron transport. (B) In condensed-
                                    history MC, secondary electrons below certain energy threshold are not explicitly tracked,
                                    and energy deposition is assumed to occur locally between the initial (A) and final (B)
                                    interaction points. (C) Correction factor applied to account for energy deposition differences
                                    between the two approaches. The mean chord length approximation (l = 2/3 d) is used to
                                    adjust the number of MDS (NMDS) estimated by the MGM model based on the energy
                                    deposited per track length (y). DAB is the distance between points A and B.




Author Manuscript




                                       Phys Med Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2026 February 14.
                    Onecha et al.                                                                                         Page 19




Author Manuscript




                                    Figure 2.




Author Manuscript
                                    Schematic representation of the simulations. a) Monoenergetic beams: Cells are
                                    homogeneously distributed in the layer, and the beam travels through the geometry after
                                    traversing a build-up region to ensure electronic equilibrium (red arrows). b) Bragg peak:
                                    The same monolayer as in a) is placed along the beam axis every 0.5 mm to compute
                                    DNA damage per cell at every depth. c) RPT: Cells are distributed in a monolayer, and the
                                    radioisotopes are either dispersed in the medium or bound to the cell membrane.




Author Manuscript




Author Manuscript




                                       Phys Med Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2026 February 14.
                    Onecha et al.                                                                                   Page 20




Author Manuscript




Author Manuscript
                                    Figure 3.
                                    Comparison of Mean DSB/Track (a) and Weighted Average Complexity (b) as a function of
                                    the frequency-mean lineal energy (yF ) for Proton and α-particles using TOPAS-MGM and
                                    TOPAS-nBio Models.




Author Manuscript




Author Manuscript




                                       Phys Med Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2026 February 14.
                    Onecha et al.                                                                                      Page 21




Author Manuscript




Author Manuscript




Author Manuscript
                                    Figure 4.
                                    Analysis of DNA MDS and complexity induced by proton and helium beam energies when
                                    depositing an average dose of 1 Gy among cells. (a) Histogram of MDS induced by a 20
                                    MeV proton beam and a 5 MeV/u helium beam. The inset shows the complexity distribution
                                    with an average complexity. (b) Average DSB/Gy as a function of LET for protons (green)
                                    and alpha particles (red), indicating higher DSB yields for alpha particles at higher LET
                                    values. Corrected values of DSB when excluding DNA fragments lower than 15kb are
                                    plotted for protons (blue) and helium ions (gray). Experimental data from electrophoresis
                                    assays are also included. (d) Average complexity as a function of LET. Shaded areas in




Author Manuscript
                                    figures b) and c) represent one standard deviation of the distribution.




                                       Phys Med Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2026 February 14.
                    Onecha et al.                                                                                        Page 22




Author Manuscript




Author Manuscript
                                    Figure 5.
                                    Distribution of induced MDS per cell for different beam energies in protons (a) and helium
                                    ions (b). Lower energy beams, associated with higher LET, produce broader distributions
                                    with higher MDS counts, indicating greater DDI heterogeneity across cells.




Author Manuscript




Author Manuscript




                                       Phys Med Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2026 February 14.
                    Onecha et al.                                                                                     Page 23




Author Manuscript




Author Manuscript
                                    Figure 6.
                                    Depth-dependent analysis of DNA damage complexity and normalized MDS for a 170 MeV
                                    proton beam (a) and a 135 MeV/u helium beam (b). For both cases, the complexity and
                                    normalized MDS are plotted against depth. The graphs show the complexity (C = 2, C = 3, C
                                    = 4, C ≥ 5) and the normalized MDS along with the dose distribution.




Author Manuscript




Author Manuscript




                                       Phys Med Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2026 February 14.
                    Onecha et al.                                                                                      Page 24




Author Manuscript




Author Manuscript
                                    Figure 7.
                                    Representation of induced DNA DSB and their complexity for RPT with 211At (blue) and
                                    225Ac (yellow) under two different conditions: (a) Membrane-Bound and (b) free in the

                                    Medium. Both graphs illustrate the frequency of cells receiving DSB when the sample is
                                    irradiated with 1 Gy, with insets showing the distribution of their complexity.




Author Manuscript




Author Manuscript




                                       Phys Med Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2026 February 14.
                    Onecha et al.                                                                                                                       Page 25




                                                                                     Table 1.
                    Relative simulation time per particle for TOPAS-nBio and TOPAS-MGM.




Author Manuscript
                                      Proton (1 MeV)     Alpha (1 MeV)

                        TOPAS-MGM            1*                 1

                        TOPAS-nBio         78 000            243 000

                    *
                     The unit corresponds to 100 miliseconds, which is the time to simulate a 1 MeV proton with TOPAS-MGM. All other values are expressed as
                    multiples of this baseline.




Author Manuscript




Author Manuscript




Author Manuscript

                                              Phys Med Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2026 February 14.
