Accuracy and Resource Estimations for Quantum Chemistry on a Near-term
Quantum Computer
Michael Kühn,∗ Peter Deglmann, and Horst Weiß
BASF SE − Quantum Chemistry Materials, Carl-Bosch-Str. 38, 67063 Ludwigshafen, Germany

Sebastian Zanker and Michael Marthaler†

arXiv:1812.06814v2 [quant-ph] 14 Aug 2019

HQS Quantum Simulations, Haid-und-Neu-Str. 18, 76131 Karlsruhe, Germany
(Dated: August 15, 2019)
The study and prediction of chemical reactivity is one of the most important application areas of
molecular quantum chemistry. Large-scale, fully error-tolerant quantum computers could provide
exact or near-exact solutions to the underlying electronic structure problem with exponentially less
effort than a classical computer thus enabling highly accurate predictions for comparably large
molecular systems. In the nearer future, however, only “noisy” devices with a limited number of
qubits that are subject to decoherence will be available. For such near-term quantum computers
the hybrid quantum-classical variational quantum eigensolver algorithm in combination with the
unitary coupled-cluster ansatz (UCCSD-VQE)[1, 2] has become an intensively discussed approach
that could provide accurate results before the dawn of error-tolerant quantum computing. In this
work we present an implementation of UCCSD-VQE that allows for the first time to treat both openand closed-shell molecules. We study the accuracy of the obtained energies for nine small molecular
systems as well as for four exemplary chemical reactions by comparing to well-established electronic
structure methods like (non-unitary) coupled-cluster and density functional theory. Finally, we
roughly estimate the required quantum hardware resources to obtain “useful” results for practical
purposes.

I.

INTRODUCTION

One of the most important application areas of molecular electronic structure calculations in both industry and
academia is the investigation and prediction of chemical
reactivity.[3] A typical quantum-chemical study of chemical reactions usually starts with the calculation of relative
electronic energies of reactants, products and transition
states. From the obtained energies, thermodynamics (enthalpies, entropies and Gibbs free energies) as well as kinetics (activation barriers and reaction rates via Eyring’s
equation[4]) can be computed. This then in principle allows a prediction of the course of a chemical reaction. As
for many other molecular properties the quality of the
prediction significantly depends on the accuracy of the
calculated electronic energies − especially in the case of
reaction rates which depend exponentially on the energy
difference between transition state and reactants.
Several different methods for calculating molecular
energies have been implemented in a large number of
quantum-chemical program packages and made available
as standard tools. Density functional theory (DFT) is
a widely used method that can also be applied to relatively large systems due to its moderate computational
requirements compared to high-level correlated electronic
structure methods. However, due to the known deficiencies of DFT the obtained accuracy might be not good
enough for some practically relevant systems. High accuracy in electronic energies usually can be achieved by

∗ michael.b.kuehn@basf.com
† michael.marthaler@quantumsimulations.de

computationally more demanding coupled-cluster (CC)
methods which exhibit a systematic convergence towards
the exact full configuration-interaction (FCI) result. As
a compromise between efficiency and accuracy the CC
expansion is most commonly truncated at the doubles term yielding the coupled-cluster singles and doubles (CCSD)[5] method. Additionally augmenting this
method by a perturbative treatment of the triple excitations (CCSD(T))[6] yields the “gold standard” method
in quantum chemistry, which exhibits high accuracy for
most practical purposes (with the exception of multireference systems / strong static correlation) and a computational effort that formally scales with the system size
to the seventh power whereas the exact solution (FCI)
would require exponential (factorial) resources on a classical computer.
Quantum computers instead could provide exact or
near-exact results for quantum systems without exponential scaling. It has been shown that a quantum computer
can efficiently simulate the time evolution of a quantum
system.[7] At the same time it is also clear that it is not
possible to efficiently find the ground state of an arbitrary
(non-natural) Hamiltonian.[8] If a universal (error-free)
quantum computer with a large number of qubits would
be available the phase estimation algorithm[9, 10] should
provide access to the exact ground-state energy, as long
as it is possible to construct an initial guess with a nonvanishing overlap with the real ground state.
In the near term, however, we can only expect a rather
small number of qubits, and even more importantly we
can only use a small number of gates since the prepared
quantum state is subject to decoherence. This is also a result of the fact that currently the number of qubits is too

2
small to accommodate the overhead for quantum error
correction, therefore every operation has a finite fidelity.
Nonetheless, it should be possible to efficiently approximate the ground state of a natural system, as would be
the case for a chemical electronic structure problem. For
near-term quantum computers it has become popular to
use algorithms based on the so-called variational quantum eigensolver (VQE),[1, 2] which combines a classical
algorithm that tries to solve a variational problem with a
quantum algorithm that provides the parameters for the
classical approach. One particular example is the unitary
coupled-cluster ansatz (UCC)[11] which is the quantum
computing equivalent to the classical CC methods. It
reduces the problem of finding the ground state to a
variational problem, which in turn reduces the number
of gates needed to be carried out on the quantum computer. However, at the same time the algorithm has to
be repeated more often, and therefore it is not necessarily
shorter in total as compared to phase estimation. Since
UCC is similar to the well established CC approach it
has generated a substantial amount of interest and will
be the quantum algorithm tested in this paper.
Until now the following molecular systems have been
studied on quantum hardware or simulators using different algorithms and different experimental realizations:
(i) molecular hydrogen (H2 ) using a NMR-based quantum hardware[12] and on a superconducting chip applying UCCSD-VQE[13] as well as on simulators including
excited-state calculations[14, 15]; (ii) dimer of H2 using UCCSD-VQE on a simulator[11]; (iii) helium hydride
cation (HeH+ ) in a solid-state spin register[16] as well as
using UCCSD-VQE on a quantum photonic chip[1]; (iv)
lithium hydride (LiH) together with H2 on a trappedion system applying UCCSD-VQE[17]; (v) beryllium dihydride (BeH2 ) together with LiH and H2 on a superconducting quantum processor with VQE[18]; (vi) water
molecule (H2 O) on a simulator comparing VQE to other
methods.[19, 20] Additionally, it was argued by Reiher et
al. that a (long-term) error-corrected quantum computer
could in principle be used to elucidate reaction mechanisms as complicated as the open question of biological
nitrogen fixation in nitrogenase enzymes.[21]
To the best of our knowledge, in the previous studies
molecular energies of closed-shell systems were mainly
compared to the numerically exact (FCI) results and
in most cases only small basis sets (mostly minimal
basis sets) were applied. In this study we present an
implementation of UCCSD-VQE that − in addition
to closed-shell species − allows for the first time to
treat open-shell molecules (e.g. systems with an odd
number of electrons). We compare molecular energies of
small systems not only to FCI but also to CCSD and
CCSD(T), methods that are routinely used in quantum
chemistry. We note that in the context of classical
computing there are several studies investigating the
accuracy of UCCSD and its extensions to higher excitations for basis sets of up to valence double- and triple-ζ
quality.[22–24] Furthermore, in comparison to previous

studies we do not only consider molecular energies but
also reaction energies and compare those to DFT results.
We note that in order to obtain “useful” results for
practical applications − like the study of chemical reactions − not only an accurate, highly-correlated method
is needed but also a sufficiently large basis set of at least
triple- or quadruple-ζ quality. Only by combining both
these prerequisites the major portion of the correlation
energy can be captured and a high accuracy is reached.
Therefore, we give a rough estimation of the quantum
resources (number of qubits and two-qubit gates which
are even more critical) needed to obtain results for small
molecules with an accuracy that is comparable to today’s
“gold standard” method CCSD(T) in combination with
a sufficiently large basis set. The following molecules
are subject to our study: water (H2 O), hydroxyl radical
(OH), lithium hydride (LiH), atomic lithium (Li), molecular nitrogen (N2 ), molecular hydrogen (H2 ), ammonia
(NH3 ), triplet methylene (:CH2 ) and singlet methylene
(CH2 ). With these, we investigate the reaction energies
of four exemplary chemical reactions:
(i) homolytic O − H-bond dissociation in the water
molecule, H2 O → OH + H;
(ii) homolytic dissociation of lithium hydride,
LiH → Li + H;
(iii) Haber-Bosch process, N2 + 3 H2 → 2 NH3 ;
(iv) energy gap between triplet- and singlet-methylene,
:CH2 → CH2 .
The paper is organized as follows: In Section II we
briefly summarize the theory of the UCCSD-VQE approach and give some details specific to our implementation for reducing the number of required gates. In Section
III we study the accuracy of molecular energies (Section
III B) as well as reaction energies (Section III C) by comparing to different methods. We furthermore roughly estimate the required quantum resources to obtain “useful”
results for practical applications.

II.

THEORY AND IMPLEMENTATION
A.

The UCCSD-VQE approach

In the VQE paradigm it is the goal to prepare a
parameter-dependent quantum state in a register of
qubits, measure a particular observable and find the parameters that optimize the value of the observable. In our
case we are interested to find the energetic ground state
of the electronic structure problem for a molecule and
therefore we measure the average energy of the prepared
states. For more details on the measurement process see
for example Refs. 2 and 25.
When it comes to preparing a reasonable parameterdependent state we will use an approach based on the CC
operators, which are well established in quantum chemistry. The CC operator, including single and double ex-

3
citations is given by
T = T1 + T2
X
T1 = tia c†a ci

(1)
(2)

i ∈ occ
a ∈ virt

T2 =

X ij
tab c†a c†b ci cj ,

(3)

i > j ∈ occ
a > b ∈ virt

where ci and c†a are the fermionic annihilation and creation operators of the orbitals i and a, respectively, obeying the according commutation relations. In this ansatz
we assume that the CC operator is applied to a trivial
initial state with a certain number of occupied orbitals,
Nocc , and a certain number of unoccupied or virtual orbitals, Nvirt . The indices i, j refer to occupied orbitals,
and a, b refer to unoccupied or virtual orbitals. To reduce the computational requirements the summations in
Equations (2) and (3) might be restricted to a chemically
relevant subset of orbital indices, which is equivalent to
choosing an “active space” that includes a selection of orbitals that should enter the correlation treatment. As the
term “active space” could be misinterpreted because it is
at the same time used in multireference calculations to
describe the space of orbitals from which a basis of Slater
determinants is formed to enter the variational optimization of the multireference function, we use in the following the term “non-frozen orbital space”. The variational
parameters are given by tia and tij
ab which we assume to
be real. For later purposes it is sensible to summarize all
termsPin the coupled cluster operator with a single index
T = x Tx .
Using the unitary exponential of the CC operator in
Equation (1) we prepare the state
†

|ψi = eT −T |ψHF i ,

(4)

where the initial state is the Hartree-Fock (HF) state
which is trivially given by a state of the form
|ψHF i = |0000 . . . 1111i ,

(5)

where |0/1i refers to a single qubit being in the state 0
or 1. In the multi-qubit register we assign each qubit
an orbital, with orbital energies from high to low. The
state |0i refers to an unoccupied orbital, while |1i refers
to an occupied orbital. The fermionic nature of the state
is preserved by the anti-commutation relations of the annihilation and creation operators.
The unitary operator which is to be applied to the HF
state can be disassembled into smaller parts using the
Trotter expansion [26]
!n

n
Y
T −T †
(T −T † )/n
(Tx −Tx† )/n
e
= e
=
e
,
(6)
x

where for VQE n = 1 is usually sufficient. A single term
in the Trotter expansion contains an Operator Tx which

Figure 1.
strings.

Gate sequence to create arbitrary Pauli

consists of a certain number of fermionic annihilation and
creation operators.
We translate the fermionic operators to spin operators
using the Jordan Wigner transformation.[27, 28] As an
example, a single excitation term transforms as
a a+1
i
c†a ci = σ+
σz . . . σzi−1 σ−
,

(7)

where σi are the Pauli operators acting on the i-th qubit.
This means that any operator Tx can be written as a
string of Pauli operators. In Figure 1 we show a gate sequence which implements a unitary operator of the form
a

a+1

eiσz σz

...σzi−1 σzi

.

(8)

Any Pauli string can be generated from this expression
in combination with single qubit rotations. Out of the
ingredients presented in this subsection we can construct
the full UCCSD-VQE routine, which allows us to access
energies close to the ground-state energy of an electronic
structure problem using a quantum computer.
Our implementation is partly based on the ProjectQ
framework [29, 30] and the OpenFermion library[31] and
can be applied to closed- as well as open-shell systems.
The HF reference state was prepared using the opensource quantum chemistry package pySCF.[32] “Noise”
originating from decoherence of the prepared quantum
states was not considered in our simulations. We use
the (classical) optimization method L-BFGS-B to find
the optimal values of the parameters tia and tij
ab . We
tested various methods available in the Python package
scipy.optimize and found L-BFGS-B to perform best.

B.

MP2 pre-screening

When implementing the unitary operator from Equation (6) a majority of operations is spent on the implementation of T2 . However, we know that probably not all
T2 -amplitudes tij
ab will be relevant for the final result. We

4

Figure 2. Precision of the ground-state energy compared to the number of two-qubit gates for H2 O. Different sizes of the “non-frozen orbital space” (12 and 14 spin
orbitals) in combination with different basis sets are investigated. We show the number of two-qubit gates needed to
implement the unitary operator from Equation 6 as a function of the difference between the VQE energy and the exact
ground-state energy.

can use second-order Møller-Plesset perturbation theory
(MP2)[33] to calculate an initial estimate for the order of
ij
magnitude of tij
ab . If the resulting estimate of tab is very
small, we can use this result to directly choose tij
ab = 0
and therefore reduce the number of terms in T2 and finally the number of gates to be carried out. However it
is obviously important to test what cut-off value for tij
ab
should be chosen. For this purpose single-point molecular energy calculations were carried out applying our
UCCSD-VQE implementation exploiting potential cancellation of gates.
We test MP2 pre-screening on a small molecule, in this
case H2 O. We use a “non-frozen orbital space” of either
12 spin orbitals (which corresponds to the orbitals in the
minimal basis set with the energetically lowest occupied
orbital being excluded) or 14 spin orbitals (obtained by
adding the energetically next higher-lying two unoccupied orbitals in order to simulate the effect of adding further states), while the initial HF state is calculated using
different basis sets. For more computational details we
refer to Section III A. In Figure 2 we show the number
of two-qubit (e.g. CNOT) gates needed to implement
the unitary operator from Equation (6) as a function of
the difference between the VQE energy and the exact
ground-state energy at the given method and basis set.
We count the two-qubit gates, since we assume that the
algorithm is supposed to be implemented on a quantum
computer without quantum error correction. In that case
the fidelity of the two-qubit gates is most probably the
limiting factor. We find that with virtually no changes

Figure 3. Number of two-qubit gates as a function
of the cut-off tolerance for H2 O. If our pre-screening
indicates that tij
ab is below the cut-off tolerance then we choose
tij
=
0.
For
further
information see Figure 2
ab

in the VQE energy the number of two-qubit gates can
roughly be reduced by more than an order of magnitude.
Finally we have checked for all molecules within this
study (in the minimal basis set) that the UCCSD-VQE
procedure converges to the same final energy both when
i
using MP2 to initialize tij
ab (ta = 0) and CCSD to iniij
i
tialize tab and ta (without pre-screening). Since CCSD
in most cases should provide an initial state close to the
final UCCSD-VQE state we therefore conclude that also
MP2 provides a sufficiently accurate initial guess.
In Figure 3 we show how the number of two-qubit gates
depends on the cut-off tolerance. We find that the reduction in the number of two-qubit gates is rather large
below a threshold of 10−5 while at the same time we see
from Figure 2 that the energy results are hardly affected
up to this point. Therefore we choose only to include
T2 -amplitudes larger than 10−5 obtained from MP2 for
all further UCCSD-VQE calculations.

C.

Gate Cancellations

In Figure 1 we show the gate sequence we used to
implement the Jordan Wigner transformation. The depicted gate sequence has to be repeated for each set of
fermionic operators. Additionally, before and after each
of these gate sets we apply single-qubit gates to create
the correct Pauli string. From the structure of the gates
it seems clear that commuting the application of the twoqubit gates − here CNOT gates − with the application
of the single-qubit gates instead of applying one gate sequence after another could allow for a substantial amount
of gate cancellations, since CNOT CNOT = 1.

5
III. ESTIMATION OF ACCURACY AND
REQUIRED QUANTUM RESOURCES FOR
SMALL QUANTUM CHEMISTRY PROBLEMS
A.

Figure 4. The number of two-qubit gates before and
after exploiting gate cancellations as well as with and
without MP2 pre-screening for H2 O. The cc-pV5Z basis
set is used.

This is also the underlying idea of the improved implementation of the gate sequence discussed in Ref. 34.
Similar ideas have been proposed in Ref. 35. The discussed gate sequence in principle allows for the implementation of arbitrary Pauli strings, however, the application of the different terms in the CC operator need to
be sorted in a particular way to make use of the gate cancellations. The gate sequence described in Ref. 34 has
the disadvantage that it needs two-qubit gates different
from the CNOT gate. Even more profound is the need
for very well-connected qubits. We note that an algorithm has been published that allows for the implementation of fermionic operators on a one-dimensional qubit
geometry.[36] Only very recently this algorithm has been
extended to potentially allow for the full implementation
of CC operators, such as shown in Equation 1.[37]

The ground-state structures of all molecules were optimized using DFT in combination with Becke’s threeparameter hybrid functional with Lee-Yang-Parr correlation (B3LYP)[38] and doubly polarized quadruple-ζ valence basis sets (def2-QZVPP). [39] All structure optimizations were done using the TURBOMOLE program
suite.[40]
All UCCSD-VQE calculations were done exploiting
gate cancellations (see Section II C) as well as T2 amplitude pre-screening based on MP2 (see Section II B)
to reduce gate counts. For comparison of the resulting energies additionally CCSD and CCSD(T) calculations were carried out using TURBOMOLE. The numerically exact results (identical to FCI) were obtained by
exact diagonalization of the Hamiltonian in the given
basis set using the OpenFermion implementation. In
H2 O, OH, NH3 , :CH2 and CH2 the energetically lowest and in N2 the two energetically lowest molecular orbital(s) was(were) always excluded from all correlation
treatments, corresponding to a freezing of the energetically well-separated 1s atomic orbitals in oxygen, nitrogen and carbon. In case of reaction energies, additional comparison to DFT was made using the generalized gradient approximation functional of Becke and
Perdew (BP86),[41, 42] the hybrid functional B3LYP as
well as Truhlar’s hybrid meta exchange-correlation functional M06-2X[43] designed for main-group thermochemistry applications. DFT-quadrature grids of size m3[44]
were employed.
The minimal basis set STO-3G[45] was used as well
as Dunning’s correlation-consistent basis sets of valence
X-tuple-ζ quality (cc-pVXZ)[46] with X = D, T, Q, 5.
For Li and H additionally split-valence (SV), double-ζ
(DZ) and triple-ζ (TZ) basis sets were employed.[47] In
all TURBOMOLE calculations corresponding CC auxiliary basis sets[48–50] were used. All calculations were
performed on the BASF supercomputer “Quriosity”.[51]

B.

In this work we implemented the gate cancellations as
described in Ref. 34 to get a first impression of the impact optimized algorithms can have on the overall number of two-qubit gates. For a large number of qubits we
reduce the number of two-qubit gates by a factor of four
as shown in Figure 4, which could be useful under certain special experimental conditions. However, considering the need for increased connectivity and the fact that
MP2 pre-screening alone creates a much larger reduction
in the gate count future work should also consider other
gate reduction schemes like the ones discussed above.

Computational Details

Molecular Energies

In this section we present a detailed investigation of
the accuracy of molecular energies obtained with our
UCCSD-VQE implementation. We compare UCCSDVQE molecular energies to FCI as well as CCSD and
the “gold standard” method CCSD(T). Furthermore,
we roughly estimate the required quantum resources
(number of qubits and number of two-qubit gates) that
are needed to obtain results that are comparable to
CCSD/CCSD(T) results when applying a sufficiently
large basis set. Here we focus on H2 O, N2 as well as
the open-shell molecules OH (doublet ground state, i.e.

6
one unpaired electron) and :CH2 (triplet ground state,
i.e. two unpaired electrons). Results for additional systems − LiH, Li (doublet ground state), H2 , NH3 and
CH2 − are in line with the discussion below and can be
found in the Supporting Information (SI) in Tables I-II
and Figures 1-4. The molecular energies discussed in this
section will later be used to study reaction energies (Section III C) which are simply given as stoichiometrically
weighted differences between different molecular energies
(partial error compensation possible).

1.

Method Comparison in the Minimal Basis Set

In Table I the HF total energies as well as the CCSD,
CCSD(T), FCI and UCCSD-VQE correlation energies
using the minimal basis set (STO-3G) are shown for
four exemplary molecules. In general, for any correlated
method (FCI, CCSD, CCSD(T), UCCSD-VQE, etc.) the
total energy can be decomposed into a HF (mean-field)
and a correlation contribution. In the minimal basis set
the correlation energy of the presented systems is roughly
of the order of a hundred kJ/mol, which is only 0.1 %
of the HF energy. In an adequate basis set for correlated methods, such as for example the cc-pVQZ basis
set, the correlation energy increases by almost one order
of magnitude but still remains significantly smaller than
the HF energy (see Table III for the example of H2 O and
OH). Nevertheless, an accurate description of the correlation energy is of utmost importance, since it usually is
of similar size or even larger than typical reaction energies, which range from a few kJ/mol to a few hundred
kJ/mol (few thousand kJ/mol for combustion processes
of large molecules), and can decide whether a chemical
reaction will happen or not. Therefore, the task of accurately describing the effect of electron correlation lies at
the heart of quantum chemistry.
Comparing CCSD and CCSD(T) to the exact (FCI)
correlation energy in the minimal basis set reveals that
errors are small compared to the absolute value of the
correlation energy amounting to less than 0.5 kJ/mol or
0.5 % for CCSD and less than 0.2 kJ/mol or 0.2 % for
CCSD(T) in case of H2 O, OH and :CH2 . In the case
of N2 , which is known to be a challenge to approximate
electronic structure methods, the errors increase to up to
10 kJ/mol or 2.5 % for CCSD and 5.5 kJ/mol or 1.4 % for
CCSD(T).
For all molecules studied within this work UCCSDVQE is between CCSD and CCSD(T). Together with
the findings in previous studies on the accuracy of
UCCSD[22–24] this indicates that the CCSD energy can
be used as a worst-case and the CCSD(T) energy as
a best-case estimate for the UCCSD-VQE energy, see
also Tables I-II in the SI. In detail, for :CH2 (and LiH)
UCCSD-VQE is very close to CCSD and in case of
H2 O (and NH3 ) closer to CCSD than to CCSD(T). In
case of CH2 UCCSD-VQE is halfway between CCSD
and CCSD(T) and for N2 UCCSD-VQE is very close to

CCSD(T). In case of OH (and Li, H2 ) there is virtually no difference between all studied correlated methods
(UCCSD-VQE, CCSD, CCSD(T) and FCI are formally
identical for two-electron systems such as H2 ). We note
that the error introduced by the choice of the small basis
set is by orders of magnitude larger than the errors due
to the applied approximate electronic structure methods,
see for example Table III.
We roughly estimate the required quantum resources
for a full UCCSD-VQE treatment of those example
molecules on quantum hardware assuming that the number of qubits is equal to the number of spin orbitals in
the given minimal basis set. This assumption leads to
10 qubits for OH, 12 for H2 O and :CH2 and 16 for N2 .
The number of required two-qubit gates − which are
known to be the most critical gates − within our gatereduced UCCSD-VQE code exploiting T2 -amplitude prescreening was counted to be 500 for OH, 1200 for H2 O,
1500 for :CH2 (as the number of occupied and unoccupied orbitals is more balanced than in H2 O) and 2500 for
N2 . For resource estimations of additional molecules see
Table I in the SI.

2.

UCCSD-VQE Calculations and Method Comparison in
Larger Basis Sets

As mentioned previously, in order to obtain highly accurate results usually large basis sets need to be applied
in combination with correlated methods. For example,
FCI will always give the exact result in the given basis
set but only in the limit of a complete basis set this result will correspond to the exact solution of the electronic
Schrödinger equation. It is known that closely approaching this basis set limit requires the use of very large basis sets, e.g. of valence 6-tuple-ζ quality or even larger,
which dramatically increases the number of virtual orbitals to be included in the correlation treatment and
therefore the computational cost (both on classical and
quantum hardware). We note that as a more economic
alternative to straightforwardly applying very large basis
sets so-called explicitly correlated variants of CC have
been developed.[52] However, those methods exhibit a
more complicated structure than conventional CC methods and require the introduction of an additional basis set
and evaluation of additional integrals. Therefore, in the
following we will not put further focus on them. Nevertheless, we believe that they might also be of great value
in the field of quantum chemistry on quantum computers
in the longer term.
For most practical purposes, e.g. the study of chemical
reactions, we assume that we are in general close enough
to the basis set limit when applying a valence quintuple-ζ
basis set, such as cc-pV5Z, and “useful”, reliable predictions might already be made with smaller basis sets of
valence triple- or quadruple-ζ quality, such as cc-pVTZ
or cc-pVQZ. Thus, in addition to the calculations in the
minimal basis set discussed in the previous Section we

7
Table I. Accuracy of molecular energies obtained with UCCSD-VQE for H2 O and N2 as well as for the open-shell
species OH and :CH2 . The HF total energy as well as the CCSD, CCSD(T), FCI and UCCSD-VQE correlation energies
are given together with the respective differences to the FCI energy (∆FCI). Additionally, the number of required qubits and
two-qubit gates is shown. All results were obtained using the minimal basis set STO-3G. Energies are in kJ/mol.
Etotal (HF)
Ecorr (CCSD)
Ecorr (CCSD(T))
Ecorr (FCI)
Ecorr (UCCSD-VQE)
# qubits
# two-qubit gates

H2 O
∆FCI
-196815.7
−
-130.159 0.314
-130.340 0.132
-130.473
0
-130.205 0.267
12
−
1198
−

N2
∆FCI
-282224.5
−
-395.526 9.890
-399.948 5.469
-405.417
0
-399.910 5.507
16
−
2510
−

OH
∆FCI
-195240.2
−
-64.900
0.001
-64.900
0.001
-64.901
0
-64.899
0.002
10
−
538
−

:CH2
∆FCI
-100909.4
−
-97.590
0.448
-97.843
0.196
-98.039
0
-97.601
0.438
12
−
1542
−

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 5. UCCSD-VQE correlation energies for up to 20 simulated qubits. Results are shown for molecules H2 O
(a), N2 (b), OH (c) and :CH2 (d) in combination with different basis sets (STO-3G, cc-pVDZ and cc-pV5Z).

also carried out UCCSD-VQE calculations using our “reference” basis set cc-pV5Z as well as an intermediate-sized
basis set of valence double-ζ quality (cc-pVDZ).
In Figure 5 the UCCSD-VQE correlation energy obtained with both basis sets is plotted against the number
of simulated qubits for four exemplary molecules. To
check whether it is possible to reduce the required quantum resources by simple truncation of the space of canonical (HF) virtual orbitals, in a first step we only correlated the same orbitals as in the minimal basis set (e.g.
for H2 O eight non-frozen occupied and four virtual spin
orbitals yielding a total of 12 simulated qubits). Then we
gradually increased the number of simulated qubits by in-

cluding more and more of the energetically lowest-lying
virtual orbitals. In total we ran the full UCCSD-VQE
procedure for up to 20 qubits (also checking the robustness of our implementation). Resulting correlation energies for additional molecules are given in Figure 1 in
the SI. Due to the exponential increase in the UCCSDVQE computation cost with the number of qubits we
were not able to correlate all virtual orbitals present in
the cc-pVDZ (for H2 O 8 occupied plus 38 virtual orbitals
requiring a total of 46 qubits) and the cc-pV5Z basis sets
(400 qubits for H2 O). However, for each molecule we
counted the number of required two-qubit gates for up
to 64 qubits. The corresponding results for four exem-

8
plary molecules when exploiting gate cancellations as well
as T2 -amplitude pre-screening to reduce the overall gate
counts are visualized in Figure 7 (see Figures 8-11 for
gate counts of additional molecules).
As expected, the absolute value of the correlation energy increases with the number of simulated qubits (see
Figure 5) while the number of required two-qubit gates
also increases (quadratically, see Figure 7, which will be
discussed later). Furthermore, it can be seen that for a
fixed, small number of qubits (e.g. 12 available qubits for
simulating the H2 O molecule) a larger portion of the correlation energy can be captured when applying a smaller
basis set that ideally just requires all of the available
qubits (e.g. 12) for inclusion of all canonical virtual orbitals in the correlation treatment. The slower convergence of the correlation energy for the cc-pV5Z basis set
compared to cc-pVDZ can be traced back to the fact that
for large basis sets our simple truncation of the virtual
orbital space in combination with energetically low-lying
diffuse basis functions leads to inclusion of virtual orbitals that contribute only little to the correlation energy.
Therefore, it seems disadvantageous to apply large basis
sets and then reduce the required quantum resources by
only considering the energetically lowest-lying canonical
virtual orbitals in the correlation treatment. We note
that this problem can at least partly be solved by rotating the canonical orbital basis to an improved orbital
basis, e.g. to MP2 natural orbitals. The frozen natural
orbital (FNO) approach is known to typically allow for
significant truncation (of up to about 50%) of the virtual orbital space for large basis sets with minimal loss
in accuracy for classical CC methods.[53–55] This therefore might also be a promising approach to reduce the
required resources (number of qubits and thus also number of two-qubit gates) in case of UCCSD-VQE on quantum computers. The number of required two-qubit gates
turns out to be virtually independent of the chosen basis
set as long as the numbers of both occupied and virtual
orbitals included in the correlation treatment are identical (i.e. for a given “non-frozen orbital space” which
leads to a given number of qubits).
When comparing the UCCSD-VQE results for different basis sets and different numbers of qubits to the respective FCI, CCSD and CCSD(T) correlation energies,
differences are very small compared to the absolute value
of the correlation energy as already discussed in Section
III B 1 for the minimal basis set. Thus, in Figure 5 all of
the other methods would be on spot with the UCCSDVQE results. As the absolute value of the correlation
energy increases the differences between these different
methods also increase but the relative error (of up to
2.5 % in case of N2 ) remains nearly constant (slight increase).
We note that in case of LiH we were able to additionally carry out UCCSD-VQE calculations in combination
with the SV, DZ and TZ basis sets correlating all available orbitals, see Table II in the SI, with all findings being
in line with the above discussion.

3.

Extrapolation to Large Basis Sets

In order to estimate the accuracy and required quantum resources for UCCSD-VQE when consistently correlating all available orbitals within basis sets of increasing
size up to our “reference” basis set cc-pV5Z, we resort to
CCSD and CCSD(T) which in contrast to UCCSD-VQE
do not exhibit exponential scaling on a classical hardware
(instead formally N 6 - and N 7 -scaling, respectively, with
N being a measure for the system size). Thus, those
methods are applicable to much larger systems, i.e. a
larger number of spin orbitals (number of qubits) can
be correlated. This “extrapolation” procedure to larger
basis sets is based on our previous findings, that for all
studied systems the UCCSD-VQE energy is always between the CCSD and the CCSD(T) energy as shown for
the minimal basis set and for larger basis sets for up to 20
qubits (see also Section III B 1 and Table I as well as Tables I-II in the SI). Furthermore and in agreement with
our observations, in previous studies using purely classical UCCSD implementations[22–24] it was found that
in cases where static correlation is weak the difference
between UCCSD and CCSD is typically very small with
UCCSD being slightly more accurate than CCSD but still
inferior to CCSD(T). When static correlation is strong,
e.g. in bond-breaking situations, UCCSD is typically also
found to be somewhat more accurate and robust than
CCSD. However, in this case both methods usually exhibit a significant error with respect to ”true“ multireference CC approaches and the exact FCI solution. The
findings in those previous studies, in which comparably
large basis sets of up to valence double- and triple-ζ quality were employed, additionally support our rough “extrapolation” technique: in the following we will simply
use the CCSD energy as a worst-case and the CCSD(T)
energy as a best-case estimate for the UCCSD-VQE energy.
In Figure 6 the aforementioned UCCSD-VQE energy
extrapolation by CCSD(T) and CCSD is shown for basis sets of increasing size (STO-3G, cc-pVDZ, cc-pVTZ,
cc-pVQZ, cc-pV5Z) and four exemplary molecules. As
the target/reference correlation energy for practical applications we choose the CCSD(T)/cc-pV5Z result, i.e.
the quantum-chemical “gold standard” result close to the
basis set limit, which is depicted as a dotted horizontal line. We note that this “gold standard” method in
a large basis set should not be seen as the “true” solution but rather as a computationally still affordable accuracy measure for all other practically relevant electronic
structure methods. The exact solution of the electronic
Schrödinger equation given by FCI in the basis set limit
would in most cases further increase the absolute value
of the correlation energy. Therefore, one should keep
in mind that in general (but not for two-electron systems) there is an additional energy gap between the exact result and CCSD(T)/cc-pV5Z. Furthermore, we note
that even exactly solving the Schrödinger equation might
not be sufficient to describe special phenomena such as

9

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 6.
Extrapolated UCCSD-VQE correlation energies for a larger number of qubits. The extrapolation
is done by using CCSD (worst-case estimate) and CCSD(T) (best-case estimate) correlation energies in accordance with the
results shown in Table I. Results are depicted for molecules H2 O (a), N2 (b), OH (c) and :CH2 (d) in combination with
basis sets of increasing size (STO-3G, cc-pVDZ, cc-pVTZ, cc-pVQZ and cc-pV5Z). The dotted horizontal line represents the
CCSD(T)/cc-pV5Z result which is chosen to be the target/reference energy.

spin-orbit coupling, non-Born-Oppenheimer effects, etc.
depending on the choice of the underlying Hamiltonian
(usually electronic, non-relativistic and within the BornOppenheimer approximation).
In the SI (Figures 2-3 therein) we additionally show
extrapolated UCCSD-VQE energies when not all virtual
orbitals are included in the correlation treatment in order
to reduce the required resources as done in Section III B 2.
As mentioned before, since this procedure in general leads
to losses in the correlation energy − and thus possibly
to inferior results − we will only focus on the results
obtained by consistently correlating all virtual orbitals
present in the chosen basis set, which leads to an optimal
and balanced correlation energy for each basis set.
In order to obtain the corresponding number of required two-qubit gates for the larger basis sets we extrapolated our energies to, we first fit a quadratic polynomial
to the calculated gate counts (for up to 64 qubits) in
Figure 7. The high quality of the fit is expressed by very
large coefficients of determination (R2 ) which are always
larger than 0.999 except for the smallest systems in our

study (for LiH, Li and H2 larger than 0.98). For each
molecule the fitted quadratic polynomial is then used for
extrapolation to a larger number of qubits (larger basis
sets).
The finding that the number of two-qubit gates depends quadratically on the number of simulated qubits
can be rationalized as follows. The number of two-qubit
gates is proportional to the amount of amplitudes in the
UCCSD ansatz, Equation (1). According to Equations
(2) and (3) the number of singles amplitudes scales as
Nvirt Nocc while the number of doubles amplitudes scales
2
2
as Nvirt
Nocc
. Consequently, the number of two-qubit
gates can be expressed as
2
2
Ntwo−qubit = cs Nocc Nvirt + cd Nocc
Nvirt
,

(9)

where cs and cd can be interpreted as the average number of two-qubit gates per singles and doubles excitation,
which can be reduced by means of several strategies, e.g.
introducing MP2 pre-screening and/or exploiting gate
cancellations. Thus, from Equation (9) it becomes obvious that the number of two-qubit gates increases quadrat-

10

Figure 7.
Estimated number of required two-qubit
gates for the UCCSD-VQE treatment of H2 O, N2 ,
OH and :CH2 . We exploit gate cancellations as well as T2 amplitude pre-screening based on MP2 to reduce gate counts.
The number of required two-qubit gates is evaluated for up
to 64 qubits applying the cc-pV5Z basis set. A quadratic
polynomial is fitted to the calculated data and then used for
extrapolation to a larger number of qubits, see also Section
III B 3. For further information see Figures 8-11.

ically with Nvirt , which is the quantity we varied when
increasing the number of simulated qubits.
From Figures 6 and 7 it can be seen that the absolute
value of the correlation energy increases with the number of simulated qubits (i.e. the size of the basis set).
The reference result is asymptotically approached while
the number of required two-qubit gates increase quadratically. For example, in case of H2 O applying the minimal basis set will introduce a large basis set incompleteness error of +660 kJ/mol (which is 83 % of the reference
correlation energy of −793.3 kJ/mol) while requiring 12
qubits as well as 1.2 · 103 two-qubit gates. From this it
also becomes evident that UCCSD-VQE calculations in
the minimal basis set will most likely not have any practical chemical relevance − but nevertheless are of great
importance for the understanding and advancement of
quantum computing. By our definition, the reference
correlation energy is finally reached (or at least very well
approximated depending on whether UCCSD-VQE is actually closer to CCSD(T) or CCSD) by a UCCSD-VQE
calculation applying the cc-pV5Z basis set requiring 400
qubits and 9.2 · 106 two-qubit gates. We note in passing that the dependence of the correlation energy on the
size of the basis set has always been subject to intense
research in quantum chemistry. Besides the aforementioned explicitly correlated variants of CC, there are also
techniques which extract (approximate) results close to
the basis set limit by extrapolating correlation energies
obtained with a series of basis sets of increasing size as
suggested by the similar shape of all curves in Figure

6.[52]
For most other molecules studied in this work estimations are similar. Roughly speaking, approaching the
“basis set limit” requires around 300 to 400 qubits as well
as 106 to 107 two-qubit gates for the small molecules presented in Figure 6 (less for H2 , somewhat more in case
of NH3 , see Figures 2-4 in the SI). As mentioned before, “useful” predictions for practical purposes − especially for chemical reactions where only energy differences
matter (thus possibility of partial error compensation) −
might already be made with smaller basis sets like ccpVQZ or cc-pVTZ, which would roughly halve the number of required qubits as well as reduce the number of
required two-qubit gates by up to one order of magnitude (for cc-pVTZ) while introducing an average loss in
the correlation energy of roughly around 3 % (cc-pVQZ)
and 8 % (cc-pVTZ) for each individual species participating in the reaction. This loss is then expected to be of
similar size as the error introduced by the approximate
correlation treatment due to the choice of the method,
which will be discussed in the following.
Besides the error due to the incompleteness of the basis set the error introduced by the approximate correlated electronic structure method itself also influences
the accuracy of the result. Thus, we will discuss the
difference between the CCSD and CCSD(T) correlation
energies − serving as our worst- and best-case estimates
for UCCSD-VQE, respectively. As the size of the basis
set increases, this difference also increases roughly up to
the cc-pVTZ level (for the example of H2 O then amounting to 20.1 kJ/mol or 2.8 %). Further increasing the size
of the basis set then only leads to a comparably small
increase in the difference between CCSD and CCSD(T)
due to the fact that the correlation energy converges.
The same behavior is observed for all other molecules in
our study with the special case of N2 where the difference between CCSD and CCSD(T) is comparably large
for all basis sets increasing from 4.4 kJ/mol (1.1 %) for
STO-3G up to 52.2 kJ/mol (4.8 %) for cc-pV5Z. As expected, in case of H2 , Li and LiH there is (virtually) no
difference between CCSD and CCSD(T) (as well as presumably UCCSD-VQE) for any of the applied basis sets.
In summary, the finding that the difference between
the CCSD and CCSD(T) correlation energy increases
with the size of the basis set up to cc-pVTZ (from where
it then remains within 4 % on average) indicates that at
least a valence triple-ζ quality basis set is needed to approximately converge the perturbative triples contribution to CCSD(T). As discussed above, at this point it is
still possible to gain a significant amount of correlation
energy when going to basis sets of valence quadruple-ζ
quality (on average reducing the basis set incompleteness error from 8 % to 3 % with the exception of LiH and
Li), which can be attributed to the known fact that the
doubles contribution to CCSD(T) converges slower with
the size of the basis set than the perturbative triples contribution. From our comparison we finally estimate that
when combining CCSD/CCSD(T) with basis sets of va-

11
lence triple- or quadruple-ζ quality the error introduced
by the finite basis set is of similar size as the error introduced by the approximate correlated method itself.
Thus, as a rule of thumb, to obtain “useful” results for
practical applications at least basis sets of valence tripleor quadruple-ζ quality should be used. Since UCCSDVQE is expected to be between CCSD and CCSD(T)
we assume that the same basis set requirements apply,
i.e. for the calculation of small molecules − as done
in this study − at least basis sets of valence triple- or
quadruple-ζ quality with all available virtual orbitals correlated should be used roughly requiring between 100 and
300 qubits and between 105 and 107 two-qubit gates. In
the next section we will check and further refine those
estimations by studying the accuracy of UCCSD-VQE
reaction energies.

C.

Reaction Energies

In this section we study the accuracy of relative energies obtained with UCCSD-VQE for four exemplary
chemical reactions by comparing to FCI, CCSD and
CCSD(T) as well as to additional results obtained with
DFT − the most commonly used method for practically
relevant quantum chemistry problems. Furthermore, we
again roughly estimate the required quantum resources
to obtain “meaningful” results, i.e. reaction energies that
are close to the CCSD/CCSD(T) results when applying
a sufficiently large basis set. Subject to our study are
the following chemical reactions: H2 O-dissociation, LiHdissociation, Haber-Bosch process and the triplet-singlet
transition in CH2 . The corresponding reaction energies
are simply computed as the stoichiometrically weighted
energy differences between all products and reactants
meaning that they are just the weighted sums and differences of the molecular energies discussed in Section III B.
Thus, in practice reaction energies are obtained by separate calculation of all species participating in the reaction and the overall hardware requirements for treating a
certain reaction on a quantum computer would typically
be determined by the computationally most demanding
molecule. We note that in practical applications such reaction energies build the foundation for further calculation of (experimentally accessible) thermodynamical and
kinetical quantities, e.g. enthalpies, entropies, Gibbs free
energies as well as reaction rates.

1.

Method Comparison in the Minimal Basis Set

In Table II the reaction energies obtained with different
methods (HF, CCSD, CCSD(T), FCI and UCCSD-VQE)
in combination with the minimal basis set are given. Furthermore, the respective differences to the FCI reaction
energies − where electron correlation is fully taken into
account in the given basis set − are also shown. All
FCI reaction energies are positive and range between

59 kJ/mol for the Haber-Bosch process and 416 kJ/mol
in case of the H2 O-dissociation meaning that at this level
of theory for each reaction the products are higher in
energy than the reactants and thus all reactions are expected to consume energy. In case of the H2 O- and
LiH-dissociation as well as the Haber-Bosch process all
other methods underestimate those FCI reaction energies whereas for the triplet-singlet transition in CH2 an
overestimation is observed. Largest errors with respect
to FCI are given in case of the HF method ranging up to
−227.9 kJ/mol for the Haber-Bosch process which even
leads to a sign change of the corresponding reaction energy.
Comparing CCSD and CCSD(T) to the FCI result
shows that in case of the H2 O- and LiH-dissociation errors are relatively small (up to −0.3 kJ/mol or −0.1 %)
compared to the absolute values of the reaction energies with CCSD(T) being closer to FCI than CCSD. For
both reactions the CCSD/CCSD(T) errors in reaction
energies are virtually identical to the errors in the H2 O
and LiH molecular energies, respectively, which can be
attributed to the fact that in case of all other participating molecules/atoms, namely OH, Li and H, all applied
correlated methods lead to virtually identical results. We
note that in case of the hydrogen atom, which is a singleelectron system, there is no electron correlation and thus
already HF is exact within the given basis set. For the
triplet-singlet transition in CH2 CCSD/CCSD(T) errors
are somewhat larger (up to +0.8 kJ/mol or 0.7 %). By
comparing to the errors in the corresponding individual
molecular energies of :CH2 and CH2 (Table I and Table
I in the SI) it can be concluded that there is partial error compensation when calculating the transition energy.
In case of the Haber-Bosch process CCSD and CCSD(T)
errors are largest due to the involvement of the challenging N2 (see Section III B 1) amounting to −8.8 kJ/mol
(−14.7 %) and −5.0 kJ/mol (−8.4 %), respectively, despite partial error compensation.
UCCSD-VQE reaction energies are usually between
CCSD and CCSD(T) reaction energies − as expected
from the molecular energies discussed in Section III B 1.
In detail, for the LiH-dissociation all methods are very
close with UCCSD-VQE being virtually identical to
CCSD. In case of the H2 O-dissociation UCCSD-VQE is
closer to CCSD than to CCSD(T) and for the tripletsinglet transition in CH2 UCCSD-VQE is very close
to CCSD(T). In case of the Haber-Bosch process the
UCCSD-VQE reaction energy is even slightly closer (error of −4.6 kJ/mol) to FCI than CCSD(T) due to better error compensation. Roughly speaking, these results
again indicate that also for reaction energies CCSD can
be used as a worst-case and CCSD(T) as a best-case estimate for UCCSD-VQE. We note that − as for molecular
energies − the error introduced by the choice of the small
basis set is by orders of magnitude larger than errors due
to the approximate correlated method itself, see for example Table III.
As mentioned above, the overall required quantum re-

12
Table II. Accuracy of reaction energies obtained with UCCSD-VQE for four exemplary chemical reactions. The
HF, CCSD, CCSD(T), FCI and UCCSD-VQE reaction energies are given together with the respective differences to the FCI
reaction energy (∆FCI). All results were obtained using the minimal basis set STO-3G. All values are in kJ/mol.
Ereact (HF)
Ereact (CCSD)
Ereact (CCSD(T))
Ereact (FCI)
Ereact (UCCSD-VQE)

H2 O → OH + H
∆FCI
350.569
-65.572
415.828
-0.313
416.008
-0.132
416.140
0
415.875
-0.265

LiH → Li + H
∆FCI
-52.532
-0.028
-0.006
0
-0.028

210.111
262.616
262.638
262.644
262.616

sources for a UCCSD-VQE calculation of a chemical reaction are determined by the molecule requiring the largest
number of qubits and/or two-qubit gates. They have already been discussed in Section III B 1 in case the minimal basis set is applied. This leads to a requirement
of 12 qubits and around 1200−1500 two-qubit gates for
the H2 O- and LiH-dissociation as well as for the tripletsinglet transition in CH2 (computationally most demanding molecules for each reaction being H2 O, LiH and :CH2 ,
respectively). In case of the Haber-Bosch process 16
qubits (for N2 ) and around 6000 two-qubit gates (for
NH3 ) are roughly needed. The fact that in our estimations NH3 requires more two-qubit gates than N2 (6000
vs. 2500) despite a smaller number of qubits (14 vs.
16) is mainly due to a more efficient T2 -amplitude prescreening in the case of N2 . We note that for larger basis
sets of the cc-pVXZ family NH3 always is computationally more demanding than N2 both with respect to the
number of required qubits and two-qubit gates.

2.

Extrapolation to Large Basis Sets

In the following we roughly estimate the required quantum resources to obtain “useful” reaction energies by extrapolating UCCSD-VQE to sufficiently large basis sets
as done in Section III B 3 for molecular energies. In Table III extrapolated UCCSD-VQE reaction energies as
well as quantum resource estimations for the example
of the H2 O-dissociation are shown along with the corresponding molecular energies for basis sets of increasing size (always correlating all virtual orbitals within
the chosen basis set). CCSD energies are again used
as worst-case and CCSD(T) energies as best-case estimates for UCCSD-VQE energies in accordance with all
previous findings.[22–24] For comparison, we also present
DFT reaction energies obtained with three commonly
used exchange-correlation functionals: generalized gradient approximation functional BP86, hybrid functional
B3LYP, hybrid meta functional M06-2X designed for
main-group thermochemistry. In Figure 8 the main results from Table III, i.e. the basis set convergence of
CCSD and CCSD(T) reaction energies, are visualized. In
Figure 8 (a) the errors of the extrapolated UCCSD-VQE
reaction energies with respect to the CCSD(T)/cc-pV5Z
reference reaction energy are plotted against the number
of simulated qubits. Additionally, errors in B3LYP/ccpV5Z and M06-2X/cc-pV5Z reaction energies are shown.
In Figure 8 (b) the estimated number of required two-

N2 + 3 H2 → 2 NH3
∆FCI
-227.940
-8.757
-4.974
0
-4.574

-168.523
50.660
54.443
59.417
54.843

:CH2 → CH2
∆FCI
163.733 60.379
104.112 0.757
103.817 0.462
103.355
0
103.843 0.488

qubit gates for our gate-reduced UCCSD-VQE treatment
is plotted against the number of qubits for all manyelectron species participating in the reaction, see also
Figure 7 for more details.
Respective tables for all
other reactions can be found in the SI, Tables IV-VI.
Corresponding results are visualized in Figures 9-11.

Resource Estimations for Obtaining Practically Relevant
Results

For each chemical reaction we now roughly estimate
the required quantum resources to obtain UCCSD-VQE
results within 4 kJ/mol (approximately 1 kcal/mol or
1 mH, a commonly used accuracy threshold in quantum
chemistry also termed as “chemical accuracy”) of the
respective CCSD(T)/cc-pV5Z reference reaction energy,
which is approached by successively increasing the number of qubits (size of the basis set) as well as the number
of two-qubit gates. We note that the above-mentioned
“chemical accuracy” threshold only serves as a rough
guideline, since in cases where UCCSD-VQE is closer to
CCSD than to CCSD(T), see Section III C 1, this accuracy criterion might actually never be fulfilled − even
in the limit of a complete basis set − if the difference
between CCSD and CCSD(T) is too large.
In case of the H2 O-dissociation, see Figure 8 and Table III, increasing basis set from STO-3G to cc-pVDZ
and cc-pVTZ roughly reduces the error in the UCCSDVQE reaction energy (with respect to the reference of
523.6 kJ/mol which is close to the experimental result of
492 kJ/mol[56] if the comparably large zero-point vibrational energy contribution of −33.8 kJ/mol is also considered) from −110 kJ/mol to −45 kJ/mol and −20 kJ/mol
while increasing the number of qubits from 12 to 46 and
114 as well as the number of two-qubit gates from 1.2·103
to 8.9 · 104 and 6.8 · 105 , respectively. At the cc-pVQZ
level requiring 228 qubits and 2.9·106 two-qubit gates the
UCCSD-VQE reaction energy is finally within “chemical
accuracy” or a few kJ/mol of the reference cc-pV5Z result (which is approached using 400 qubits and 9.2 · 106
two-qubit gates). The required quantum resources for
obtaining the desired “chemical accuracy” (cc-pVQZ basis set needed) are visualized by an “x” for each molecule
in Figure 8 (b). When comparing those requirements for
H2 O and OH it is obvious that H2 O is the more demanding system both with respect to the number of qubits
and number of two-qubit gates, thus dictating the overall quantum hardware requirements. However, we note

13
Table III. Extrapolated UCCSD-VQE reaction energies for the H2 O-dissociation, H2 O → OH + H, along with
corresponding individual molecular energies for basis sets of increasing size. The extrapolation is carried out by
using CCSD energies (worst-case estimates) in accordance with the results shown in Table I. The obtained CCSD total energies
are splitted into a HF total energy contribution and a CCSD correlation energy contribution. For comparison, DFT reaction
energies using the functionals BP86, B3LYP and M06-2X are also shown. Additionally, the number of required qubits as well
as the number of two-qubit gates are estimated for the computationally most demanding system at a certain basis set quality
(here H2 O), see also the extrapolation in Figure 8. All energies are in kJ/mol.
Etotal (HF)
Ecorr (CCSD)
Etotal (CCSD)
Etotal (HF)
OH
Ecorr (CCSD)
Etotal (CCSD)
H
Etotal
Ereact, total (HF)
Ereact, corr (CCSD)
Reaction
Ereact, total (CCSD)
# qubits
# two-qubit gates
Ereact, total (BP86)
Reaction (DFT) Ereact, total (B3LYP)
Ereact, total (M06-2X)
H2 O

STO-3G
-196815.7
-130.2
-196945.9
-195240.2
-64.9
-195305.1
-1225.0
350.6
65.3
415.8
12
1.2 · 103
504.2
488.9
499.2

(a)

cc-pVDZ
-199607.9
-554.9
-200162.8
-197946.3
-430.2
-198376.4
-1310.9
350.8
124.7
475.5
46
8.9 · 104
507.0
490.3
500.2

cc-pVTZ
-199687.5
-702.4
-200389.9
-198012.9
-560.5
-198573.4
-1312.3
362.4
141.8
504.3
114
6.8 · 105
523.5
507.1
515.9

cc-pVQZ
-199707.7
-751.2
-200458.9
-198030.2
-603.1
-198633.3
-1312.6
364.8
148.1
512.9
228
2.9 · 106
527.0
510.9
518.2

cc-pV5Z
-199713.6
-768.2
-200481.8
-198035.1
-618.1
-198653.2
-1312.7
365.8
150.1
515.9
400
9.2 · 106
528.5
512.5
519.6

(b)

Figure 8. Estimation of the required quantum resources for obtaining reaction energies of certain accuracy for
the H2 O-dissociation.
(a) Error in (extrapolated) UCCSD-VQE reaction energies for a larger number of qubits with respect to the CCSD(T)/cc-pV5Z
target/reference reaction energy (523.6 kJ/mol). The extrapolated UCCSD-VQE results are obtained by using CCSD (worstcase estimate) and CCSD(T) (best-case estimate) reaction energies. For further information see Table III. For comparison,
errors in DFT reaction energies using the functionals B3LYP and M06-2X in combination with the cc-pV5Z basis set are also
depicted.
(b) Estimated number of required two-qubit gates for an optimized UCCSD-VQE treatment. A quadratic polynomial (an2qubits +
bnqubits + c) is fitted to the calculated data (aH2 O = 59.6, bH2 O = −885.2, cH2 O = 3258.5, aOH = 57.7, bOH = −597.4,
cOH = −117.1) and then used for extrapolation to a larger number of qubits. For orientation, the required quantum resources
for a calculation using the cc-pVQZ basis set (needed to obtain a reaction energy within or close to “chemical accuracy” of the
CCSD(T)/cc-pV5Z reference) are visualized by an “x” for each molecule. For further information see also Figure 7.

that for a fixed number of qubits (e.g. 150) OH would
require slightly more two-qubit gates than H2 O. For all
basis sets the above-discussed errors in reaction energies
are by a factor of five smaller than the errors in H2 O
and OH molecular energies due to partial error compensation. As for molecular energies the difference between
the CCSD and CCSD(T) reaction energy increases with
the size of the basis set from 0.2 kJ/mol for STO-3G up
to 6.7 kJ/mol for cc-pVTZ with the CCSD reaction energy always being below the CCSD(T) reaction energy.
Further increasing the size of the basis set only leads
to comparably small increases in those differences up to

7.7 kJ/mol for cc-pV5Z. This again indicates that at least
basis sets of valence triple-ζ quality are needed to approximately converge the perturbative triples contribution in
CCSD(T) to the reaction energy. Comparing to H2 O and
OH molecular energies, differences between CCSD and
CCSD(T) are approximately by a factor of three smaller
when calculating the dissociation reaction energy due to
partial error compensation. In summary, applying the
cc-pVQZ basis set requiring 228 qubits and 2.9 · 106 twoqubit gates leads to a basis set incompleteness error in
the reaction energy which is of similar size as the difference between CCSD and CCSD(T) (a few kJ/mol).

14

(a)

(b)

Figure 9. Estimation of the required quantum resources for obtaining reaction energies of certain accuracy for
the LiH-dissociation. For further information see Table IV in the SI and Figure 8.
(a) Error in (extrapolated) UCCSD-VQE reaction energies with respect to the CCSD(T)/cc-pV5Z reaction energy (246.1
kJ/mol).
(b) Estimated number of required two-qubit gates for an optimized UCCSD-VQE treatment. A quadratic polynomial (an2qubits +
bnqubits + c; aLiH = 9.7, bLiH = 103.5, cLiH = −1171.9, aLi = 1.6, bLi = 84.0, cLi = −312.0) is used for extrapolation to a larger
number of qubits. For further information see also Figure 7.

For the LiH-dissociation, see Figure 9, both the absolute errors as well as the reference reaction energy of
246.1 kJ/mol (which is in very good agreement with the
experimental result of 242 kJ/mol[57]) are smaller than
for the H2 O-dissociation leading to similar relative errors. Also, we find a comparably small error when applying the minimal basis set which − in contrast to the
larger cc-pVXZ basis sets − overestimates the reference
reaction energy. We note that the slow basis set convergence of LiH and Li molecular energies (i.e. comparably
large errors when applying cc-pVTZ and cc-pVQZ) is not
reflected in the LiH-dissociation reaction energy due to
error compensation. Thus, as for the H2 O-dissociation
applying the cc-pVQZ basis set leads to an error below a
few kJ/mol requiring 170 qubits and 3.0 · 105 two-qubit
gates with our worst- and best-case estimates for the
UCCSD-VQE reaction energy being virtually identical.
We note that in case of the LiH-dissociation we have
additionally calculated actual UCCSD-VQE reaction energies (as done in case of the minimal basis set; not by
extrapolation) for the SV, DZ and TZ basis sets with all
findings being in line with the previous discussion, see
Table III in the SI.
For the Haber-Bosch process, see Figure 10, absolute
errors are somewhat larger than in case of the H2 Odissociation (relative errors more than twice as large)
and a slightly slower basis set convergence is observed.
Thus, at least the cc-pVQZ basis set needs to be applied
to achieve an error within a few kJ/mol of the reference
reaction energy requiring 288 qubits and 1.2 · 107 twoqubit gates. At this basis set level the difference between
our worst- and best-case estimates for the UCCSD-VQE
reaction energy is also of similar size (6 kJ/mol). Remarkably, when using the minimal basis set a very large

basis set incompleteness error of around +220 kJ/mol is
observed which even leads to a change in the sign of the
reaction energy with respect to the cc-pV5Z reference result. We also note that there is a sign change of the
correlation energy contribution (Ereact, corr (CCSD), see
Table V in the SI) when increasing the basis set from
cc-pVDZ to cc-pVTZ, underlining again the importance
of applying sufficiently large basis sets.

For the triplet-singlet transition in CH2 , see Figure
11, absolute errors are by far smallest and basis set
convergence is fastest (however comparably large relative errors due to a small reference transition energy of
39.4kJ/mol that compares very well to the experimental
value of 38 kJ/mol[58]). This might partially be traced
back to good error compensation already for smaller basis sets since “only” the two energetically lowest electronic states of one and the same molecule need to be
addressed instead of the formation and breaking of chemical bonds (one broken bond in case of the H2 O- and LiHdissociation and a complete rearrangement of atoms in
case of the Haber-Bosch process). However, we note that
correctly computing the gap between (or even the order
of) states with different spin multiplicity is in general not
trivial, especially for transition metal compounds. For
the triplet-singlet transition in CH2 we find that already
the cc-pVTZ basis set is sufficiently large to achieve an
error within a few kJ/mol of the reference transition energy requiring 114 qubits and 5.0 · 105 two-qubit gates.
At this basis set level the difference between our worstand best-case estimates for the UCCSD-VQE transition
energy is again of similar size (4 kJ/mol).

15

(a)

(b)

Figure 10. Estimation of the required quantum resources for obtaining reaction energies of certain accuracy
for the Haber-Bosch process. For further information see Table V in the SI and Figure 8.
(a) Error in (extrapolated) UCCSD-VQE reaction energies with respect to the CCSD(T)/cc-pV5Z reaction energy (-163.3
kJ/mol).
(b) Estimated number of required two-qubit gates for an optimized UCCSD-VQE treatment. A quadratic polynomial (an2qubits +
bnqubits + c; aN2 = 52.6, bN2 = −1185.4, cN2 = 8542.9, aH2 = 1.6, bH2 = 23.7, cH2 = −29.1, aNH3 = 151.7, bNH3 = −2215.0,
cNH3 = 6026.5) is used for extrapolation to a larger number of qubits. For further information see also Figure 7.

(a)

(b)

Figure 11. Estimation of the required quantum resources for obtaining transition energies of certain accuracy
for the triplet-singlet transition in CH2 . For further information see Table VI in the SI and Figure 8.
(a) Error in (extrapolated) UCCSD-VQE transition energies with respect to the CCSD(T)/cc-pV5Z transition energy (39.4
kJ/mol).
(b) Estimated number of required two-qubit gates for an optimized UCCSD-VQE treatment. A quadratic polynomial (an2qubits +
bnqubits +c; a:CH2 = 42.6, b:CH2 = −476.1, c:CH2 = 1015.7, aCH2 = 36.5, bCH2 = −413.1, cCH2 = 1468.2) is used for extrapolation
to a larger number of qubits. For orientation, the required quantum resources for a calculation using the cc-pVTZ basis set
(needed to obtain a reaction energy within or close to “chemical accuracy” of the CCSD(T)/cc-pV5Z reference) are visualized
by an “x” for each molecule. For further information see also Figure 7.

Comparison to DFT and HF

In Table III and Tables IV-VI in the SI extrapolated UCCSD-VQE reaction energies are also compared
to DFT and HF reaction energies (Ereact, total ). It is
not very surprising for a reader who is acquainted with
the characteristics of quantum-chemical methods, that
both DFT (where electron correlation is included via an
exchange-correlation functional instead of systematic ex-

citation of electrons to unoccupied orbitals) and HF (no
electron correlation considered) show a faster basis set
convergence than correlated methods such as CC due
to a faster convergence of molecular energies. E.g. in
case of the molecular energies of H2 O and OH when applying cc-pVTZ the HF contribution (Etotal (HF)) to the
CCSD total molecular energy is converged within 0.01 %
or +20 kJ/mol whereas the CCSD correlation contribution (Ecorr (CCSD)) still shows an error of about 9 % or

16
+60 kJ/mol with respect to the corresponding reference
values in the cc-pV5Z basis set. We note that the highly
different relative errors are also due to the fact that the
HF contribution is by more than two orders of magnitude larger than the CCSD correlation contribution.
Thus, HF and DFT reaction energies within 4 kJ/mol
(threshold defined above) of the respective cc-pV5Z result are usually already obtained with smaller basis sets
than needed in case of correlated methods (typically ccpV(X-1)Z is sufficient instead of cc-pVXZ as needed for
CC): cc-pVTZ for the H2 O- and LiH-dissociation, only
cc-pVDZ for the triplet-singlet transition in CH2 and −
as an exception − still cc-pVQZ in case of the HaberBosch process.
Comparing the DFT reaction energies to the respective
CCSD(T)/cc-pV5Z reference reaction energies, absolute
errors amount to 1−11 kJ/mol when applying the B3LYP
functional, 4 − 17 kJ/mol in case M06-2X is used and
2 − 26 kJ/mol for BP86. Thus, for the simple exemplary
reactions studied in this work already DFT in combination with B3LYP could allow for “useful” predictions that
on average are of similar (in some cases slightly worse)
accuracy as CCSD, CCSD(T) or UCCSD-VQE combined
with sufficiently large basis sets. However, the larger discrepancies for M06-2X and BP86 suggest that DFT is
not in general suited to obtain reaction energies close to
“chemical accuracy”. It is worth mentioning that DFT
calculations in general only come with a computational
cost which is similar to that of HF despite approximately
accounting for electron correlation (however in a rather
unsystematic fashion), i.e. no computationally expensive
CC- or CI-like correlation expansion is necessary and thus
DFT calculations can be run efficiently on classical hardware. Finally, we note that the HF method shows by far
the largest errors with respect to the CCSD(T)/cc-pV5Z
reference reaction energies ranging up to 158 kJ/mol due
to the total neglect of electron correlation. This again
demonstrates that the correlation energy contribution to
the reaction energy typically is of similar size as the reaction energy itself and once again underlines the importance of accurately accounting for electron correlation
(e.g. by correlated methods in combination with sufficiently large basis sets or DFT).

Summary

In summary, by using CCSD and CCSD(T) as a worstand best-case estimates for UCCSD-VQE reaction energies we expect that results within or − in cases where
UCCSD-VQE is closer to CCSD than CCSD(T) − close
to “chemical accuracy” of the respective CCSD(T)/ccpV5Z reference reaction energies are typically obtained
when applying cc-pVQZ basis sets (cc-pVTZ for the
triplet-singlet transition in CH2 is sufficient). The errors due to the basis set incompleteness (within 4 kJ/mol)
are then estimated to be of similar size as the “uncertainty” of our extrapolation, namely the difference be-

tween CCSD and CCSD(T) (within 7 kJ/mol). As expected, absolute errors in reaction energies are found to
be significantly smaller than absolute errors in molecular energies due to partial error compensation. We
find that reaction energies obtained with DFT in combination with the B3LYP functional exhibit a faster basis set convergence and are on average of similar or in
some cases slightly worse accuracy (errors between 1 and
11 kJ/mol; for M06-2X and BP86 somewhat larger errors) than CCSD, CCSD(T) and UCCSD-VQE reaction
energies while requiring significantly less computational
resources (an efficient simulation on classical hardware is
possible). Overall, the findings in this section are in line
with our previous estimates for molecular energies (see
Section III B 3), that in order to obtain “useful” UCCSDVQE results for practical applications (e.g. simulating
chemical reactions of small molecules) basis sets of at
least valence triple-ζ or quadruple-ζ quality should be
used roughly requiring between 100 and 300 qubits as
well as between 105 and 107 two-qubit gates.

IV.

CONCLUSION

We presented a detailed study estimating the accuracy
and required quantum hardware resources when running small quantum chemistry applications on a quantum
computer. Using our implementation of the UCCSDVQE approach in combination with reduced gate counts
(exploiting gate cancellations as well as pre-screening
based on MP2) we computed the molecular energies
of nine small atomic/molecular systems including openshell species (H2 O, OH, LiH, Li, N2 , H2 , NH3 , tripletCH2 and singlet-CH2 ) by simulating a “noise-free” quantum computer with up to 20 qubits. From these molecular energies we also calculated reaction energies − in
general relevant for studying and predicting chemical reactivity − for the H2 O- and LiH-dissociation, the HaberBosch process as well as the triplet-singlet transition in
CH2 .
Absolute errors of UCCSD-VQE molecular and reaction energies with respect to the exact (FCI) results
are found to be very small (below 1 kJ/mol) when using the minimal basis set. Reaction energies are always
closer to the respective exact results than molecular energies due to partial error compensation. In case of
N2 /Haber-Bosch process which is known to be challenging for approximate electronic structure methods errors
range up to 5 kJ/mol. UCCSD-VQE results are usually between or close to results obtained with CCSD,
the classical non-variational counterpart, and CCSD(T),
the quantum-chemical “gold standard”[22–24] indicating
that CCSD might be used as a worst-case and CCSD(T)
as a best-case estimate for UCCSD-VQE. Thus no clear
advantage in applying UCCSD-VQE instead of CCSD(T)
was observed. Within our optimized implementation the
UCCSD-VQE treatment of the above-mentioned small
systems in the minimal basis set typically comes with a

17
computational cost of O(10) qubits and O(103 ) two-qubit
gates with the latter being expected to be more critical.
Since in general correlated approaches such as CC
methods require the usage of much larger basis sets to
obtain “useful” results we also considered correlationconsistent basis sets of up to valence quintuple-ζ quality which should provide results close enough to the basis set limit for practical purposes like reaction energies.
Due to the exponential scaling of UCCSD-VQE on classical hardware we had to rely on extrapolation to access results and gate counts for those larger basis sets,
which was done by simply using the CCSD energy as a
worst-case and the CCSD(T) energy as a best-case estimate in agreement with all previous findings. We showed
that UCCSD-VQE is expected to provide “useful” reaction energies within or close to “chemical accuracy”
(4 kJ/mol) of our CCSD(T)/valence quintuple-ζ reference results, when using valence triple- or quadruple-ζ
basis sets. This roughly requires between 100 and 300
qubits as well as between 105 and 107 two-qubit gates
for small quantum chemistry applications with the “uncertainty” of our extrapolation also being in the order of
a few kJ/mol (within 7 kJ/mol).
For all investigated reactions DFT in combination
with the B3LYP functional provides results of similar
(or in some cases slightly worse) accuracy as extrapolated UCCSD-VQE (errors between 1 and 11 kJ/mol)
while running efficiently on classical hardware in contrast to UCCSD. However, benchmark studies on much
larger and diverse sets of chemical reactions as well as
the fact that in our study discrepancies are larger for
other density functionals suggest that DFT is in general
not suited to obtain reaction energies close to “chemical
accuracy”.[59, 60]
From our extrapolations we can further estimate that a
medium-sized organic molecule like naphthalene (C10 H8 ,
68 electrons) would roughly require around 800/1500
qubits and O(107 )/O(108 ) two-qubit gates for a UCCSDVQE treatment on a quantum computer when apply-

ing valence triple-/quadruple-ζ basis sets. Overall this
means that for practically relevant UCCSD-VQE simulations of small- to medium-sized systems already a device with a few hundred (logical) qubits and error correction is probably needed. However, it should be kept
in mind that our resource estimations are not strict and
certainly not best-case estimates. They should rather be
regarded as rough guidelines since there is definitely room
for further improvement − in particular for reducing
the number of required two-qubit gates, e.g. by strategies borrowed from “classical” quantum chemistry[37] or
more hardware-efficient techniques like hardware-efficient
VQE,[18, 20] the Hamiltonian variational approach,[61]
a low-depth circuit ansatz[62] and most recently qubit
coupled-cluster.[35] On the other hand, for running simulations on actual quantum hardware additionally the
effect of noise on the accuracy of the results as well as
the connectivity of qubits on the chip has to be considered, which might further increase the number of required
gates. Our estimations clearly exceed the capabilities of
today’s quantum hardware, which − in case of superconducting chips or trapped ion systems with O(10) qubits
− roughly allow for O(102 − 103 ) two-qubit gates on
average.[63–65] However, fast progress is made and when
a scaled-up error-corrected quantum hardware finally becomes available other approaches besides UCCSD-VQE
such as the phase estimation algorithm will come into
play providing the exact result in large basis sets for comparably large systems and thus outperforming all classically feasible methods (and also UCCSD-VQE). Until
then, quantum algorithms will also have improved reducing the overall hardware requirements.

[1] A. Peruzzo, J. McClean, P. Shadbolt, M. Yung, X. Zhou,
P. Love, A. Aspuru-Guzik, and J. L. O’Brien, Nature
Comm. 5, 4213 (2014).
[2] J. R. McClean, J. Romero, R. Babbush, and A. AspuruGuzik, New J. Phys. 18, 023023 (2016).
[3] P. Deglmann, A. Schäfer, and C. Lennartz, Int. J. Quantum Chem. 115, 107 (2015).
[4] H. Eyring, J. Chem. Phys. 3, 107 (1935).
[5] G. D. Purvis and R. J. Bartlett, J. Chem. Phys. 76, 1910
(1982).
[6] K. Raghavachari, G. W. Trucks, J. A. Pople, and
M. Head-Gordon, Chem. Phys. Lett. 157, 479 (1989).
[7] S. Lloyd, Science 273, 1073 (1996).
[8] S. P. Jordan, D. Gosset, and P. J. Love, Phys. Rev. A
81, 032331 (2010).
[9] D. S. Abrams and S. Lloyd, Phys. Rev. Lett. 79, 2586
(1997).

[10] D. S. Abrams and S. Lloyd, Phys. Rev. Lett. 83, 5162
(1999).
[11] J. Romero, R. Babbush, J. R. McClean, C. Hempel,
P. Love,
and A. Aspuru-Guzik, arXiv.org
ePrint archive , arXiv:1701.02691 [quant (2017),
http://arxiv.org/abs/1701.02691 (accessed May 17,
2019).
[12] J. Du, N. Xu, X. Peng, P. Wang, S. Wu, and D. Lu,
PRL 104, 030502 (2010).
[13] P. J. J. O’Malley, R. Babbush, I. D. Kivlichan,
J. Romero, J. R. McClean, R. Barends, J. Kelly,
P. Roushan, A. Tranter, N. Ding, B. Campbell, Y. Chen,
Z. Chen, B. Chiaro, A. Dunsworth, A. G. Fowler, E. Jeffrey, E. Lucero, A. Megrant, J. Y. Mutus, M. Neeley,
C. Neill, C. Quintana, D. Sank, A. Vainsencher, J. Wenner, T. C. White, P. V. Coveney, P. J. Love, H. Neven,
A. Aspuru-Guzik, and J. M. Martinis, Phys. Rev. X 6,

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

S.Z. and M.M. thank Prof. Alexander Shnirman and
Prof. Frank Wilhelm-Mauch for their support.

18
031007 (2016).
[14] J. R. McClean, M. E. Kimchi-Schwartz, J. Carter, and
W. A. de Jong, Phys. Rev. A 95, 042308 (2017).
[15] J. I. Colless, V. V. Ramasesh, D. Dahlen, M. S. Blok,
M. E. Kimchi-Schwartz, J. R. McClean, J. Carter, W. A.
de Jong, and I. Siddiqi, Phys. Rev. X 8, 011021 (2018).
[16] Y. Wang, F. Dolde, J. Biamonte, R. Babbush,
V. Bergholm, S. Yang, I. Jakobi, P. Neumann,
A. Aspuru-Guzik, J. D. Whitfield, and J. Wrachtrup,
ACS Nano 9, 7769 (2015).
[17] C. Hempel, C. Maier, J. Romero, J. McClean, T. Monz,
H. Shen, P. Jurcevic, B. Lanyon, P. Love, R. Babbush,
A. Aspuru-Guzik, R. Blatt, and C. Roos, Phys. Rev. X
8, 031022 (2018).
[18] A. Kandala, A. Mezzacapo, K. Temme, M. Takita,
M. Brink, J. M. Chow, and J. M. Gambetta, Nature
549, 242 (2017).
[19] T. Bian, D. Murphy, R. Xia, A. Daskin, and S. Kais,
arXiv.org ePrint archive , arXiv:1804.05453 [quant
(2018), http://arxiv.org/abs/1804.05453 (accessed May
17, 2019).
[20] P. Barkoutsos, J. Gonthier, I. Sokolov, N. Moll, G. Salis,
A. Fuhrer, M. Ganzhorn, D. Egger, M. Troyer, A. Mezzacapo, S. Filipp, and I. Tavernelli, Phys. Rev. A 98,
022322 (2018).
[21] M. Reiher, N. Wiebe, K. M. Svore, D. Wecker, and
M. Troyer, PNAS 114, 7555 (2017).
[22] B. Cooper and P. J. Knowles, J. Chem. Phys. 133,
234102 (2010).
[23] F. A. Evangelista, J. Chem. Phys. 134, 224102 (2011).
[24] G. Harsha, T. Shiozaki, and G. E. Scuseria, J. Chem.
Phys. 148, 044107 (2018).
[25] A. F. Izmaylov, T.-C. Yen, and I. G. Ryabinkin, Chem.
Sci. 10, 3746 (2019).
[26] H. F. Trotter, Proc. Amer. Math. Soc. 10, 545 (1959).
[27] P. Jordan and E. Wigner, Zeitschrift für Physik 47, 631
(1928).
[28] R. Somma, G. Ortiz, J. Gubernatis, E. Knill, and
R. Laflamme, Phys. Rev. A 65, 042323 (2002).
[29] D. S. Steiger, T. Häner, and M. Troyer, Quantum 2, 49
(2018).
[30] T. Häner, D. S. Steiger, K. Svore, and M. Troyer, Quantum Sci. Technol. 3, 020501 (2018).
[31] J. R. McClean, I. D. Kivlichan, K. J. Sung, D. S.
Steiger, Y. Cao, C. Dai, E. S. Fried, C. Gidney,
B. Gimby, P. Gokhale, T. Häner, T. H., V. Havlicek,
C. Huang, J. Izaac, Z. Jiang, X. Liu, M. Neeley,
T. O’Brien, I. Ozfidan, M. D. Radin, J. Romero, N. Rubin, N. P. D. Sawaya, K. Setia, S. Sim, M. Steudtner, Q. Sun, W. Sun, F. Zhang,
and R. Babbush, arXiv.org ePrint archive , arXiv:1710.07629 [quant
(2017), http://arxiv.org/abs/1710.07629 (accessed May
17, 2019).
[32] Q. Sun, T. C. Berkelbach, N. S. Blunt, G. H. Booth,
S. G., Z. Li, J. Liu, J. D. McClain, E. R. Sayfutyarova,
S. Sharma, S. Wouters, and G. K. Chan, Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Computational Molecular Science
8, e1340 (2017).
[33] C. Møller and M. S. Plesset, Phys. Rev. 46, 618 (1934).
[34] M. B. Hastings, D. Wecker, B. Bauer, and M. Troyer,
QIC 15, 1 (2015).
[35] I. G. Ryabinkin, T.-C. Yen, S. N. Genin, and A. F.
Izmaylov, J. Chem. Theory Comput. 14, 6317 (2018).

[36] I. D. Kivlichan, J. McClean, N. Wiebe, C. Gidney,
A. Aspuru-Guzik, G. K.-L. Chan, and R. Babbush, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 120, 110501 (2018).
[37] M. Motta, E. Ye, J. R. McClean, Z. Li, A. J. Minnich, R. Babbush,
and F. K.-L. Chan, arXiv.org
ePrint archive , arXiv:1808.02625 [quant (2018),
http://arxiv.org/abs/1808.02625 (accessed May 17,
2019).
[38] A. D. Becke, J. Chem. Phys. 98, 5648 (1993).
[39] F. Weigend and R. Ahlrichs, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys.
7, 3297 (2005).
[40] TURBOMOLE V7.2 2017, a development of University
of Karlsruhe and Forschungszentrum Karlsruhe GmbH,
1989-2007, TURBOMOLE GmbH, since 2007; available
from http://www.turbomole.com.
[41] A. D. Becke, Phys. Rev. A 38, 3098 (1988).
[42] J. P. Perdew, Phys. Rev. B 33, 8822 (1986).
[43] Y. Zhao and D. Truhlar, Theor. Chem. Acc. 120, 215
(2008).
[44] O. Treutler and R. Ahlrichs, J. Chem. Phys. 102, 346
(1995).
[45] W. J. Hehre, R. F. Stewart, and J. A. Pople, J. Chem.
Phys. 51, 2657 (1969).
[46] T. H. Dunning, J. Chem. Phys. 90, 1007 (1989).
[47] A. Schäfer, H. Horn, and R. Ahlrichs, J. Chem. Phys.
97, 2571 (1992).
[48] F. Weigend, M. Häser, H. Patzelt, and R. Ahlrichs,
Chem. Phys. Lett. 294, 143 (1998).
[49] F. Weigend, A. Köhn, and C. Hättig, J. Chem. Phys.
116, 3175 (2002).
[50] C. Hättig, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 7, 59 (2005).
[51] http://www.basf.com/supercomputer.
[52] C. Hättig, W. Klopper, A. Köhn, and D. P. Tew, Chem.
Rev. 112, 4 (2012).
[53] C. Sosa, J. Geertsen, G. W. Trucks, R. J. Bartlett, and
J. A. Franz, Chem. Phys. Lett. 159, 148 (1989).
[54] A. G. Taube and R. J. Bartlett, J. Chem. Phys. 128,
164101 (2008).
[55] A. E. DePrince and C. D. Sherrill, J. Chem. Theory Comput. 9, 293 (2013).
[56] P. Maksyutenko, T. R. Rizzo, and O. V. Boyarkin, J.
Chem. Phys. 125, 181101 (2006).
[57] Y. C. Chan, D. R. Harding, W. C. Stwalley, and C. R.
Vidal, J. Chem. Phys. 85, 2436 (1986).
[58] A. R. W. McKellar, P. R. Bunker, T. J. Sears, K. M.
Evenson, R. J. Saykally, and S. R. Langhoff, J. Chem.
Phys. 79, 5251 (1983).
[59] R. Peverati and D. G. Truhlar, J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 2,
2810 (2011).
[60] J. P. Perdew, A. Ruzsinszky, J. Tao, V. N. Staroverov,
G. E. Scuseria, and G. I. Csonka, J. Chem. Phys. 123,
062201 (2005).
[61] D. Wecker, M. B. Hastings, and M. Troyer, Phys. Rev.
A 92, 042303 (2015).
[62] P.-L. Dallaire-Demers,
J. Romero,
L. Veis,
S. Sim,
and A. Aspuru-Guzik, arXiv.org
ePrint archive , arXiv:1801.01053 [quant (2018),
http://arxiv.org/abs/1801.01053 (accessed May 17,
2019).
[63] R. Barends, J. Kelly, A. Megrant, A. Veitia, D. Sank,
E. Jeffrey, T. C. White, J. Mutus, A. G. Fowler,
B. Campbell, Y. Chen, B. Chiaro, A. Dunsworth,
C. Neill, P. O’Malley, P. Roushan, A. Vainsencher,
J. Wenner, A. N. Korotkov, A. N. Cleland, and J. M.

19
Martinis, Nature 508, 500 (2014).
[64] See for example also http://quantumexperience.ng.
bluemix.net/qx/devices
and
http://www.rigetti.com/qpu for specifications of
IBM’s and rigetti’s superconducting hardware, respectively (accessed May 14, 2019).
[65] K. Wright, K. M. Beck, S. Debnath, J. M. Amini,
Y. Nam, N. Grzesiak, J.-S. Chen, N. C. Pisenti,
M. Chmielewski, C. Collins, K. M. Hudek, J. Mizrahi,
J. D. Wong-Campos, S. Allen, J. Apisdorf, P. Solomon,
M. Williams, A. M. Ducore, A. Blinov, S. M. Kreikemeier, V. Chaplin, M. Keesan, C. Monroe, and J. Kim,
arXiv.org ePrint archive , arXiv:1903.08181 [quant
(2019), http://arxiv.org/abs/1903.08181 (accessed May
17, 2019).

20

21

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

Figure SI 1. UCCSD-VQE correlation energies for up to 20 simulated qubits. Results are shown for molecules LiH (a), Li (b),
NH3 (c), H2 (d) and CH2 (e) in combination with different basis sets (STO-3G, cc-pVDZ and cc-pV5Z).

22

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure SI 2. Extrapolated UCCSD-VQE correlation energies for a larger number of qubits. The extrapolation is done by
using CCSD correlation energies (worst-case estimates) in accordance with the results shown in Table I in the main paper.
Results are depicted for molecules H2 O (a), N2 (b), OH (c) and :CH2 (d) in combination with basis sets of increasing size
(STO-3G, cc-pVDZ, cc-pVTZ, cc-pVQZ and cc-pV5Z). The dotted horizontal line represents the CCSD(T)/cc-pV5Z result
which is chosen to be the target/reference energy. For each basis set we gradually increased the number of correlated spin
orbitals (= number of qubits) by including more and more of the energetically lowest-lying virtual orbitals. The blue dashed
line connects the optimal CCSD correlation energy for each basis set (all virtual orbitals included in the correlation treatment).

Table SI I. Accuracy of molecular energies obtained with UCCSD-VQE for LiH, Li, NH3 , H2 and CH2 . The HF total energy
as well as the CCSD, CCSD(T), FCI and UCCSD-VQE correlation energies are given together with the respective differences
to the FCI energy (∆FCI). Additionally, the number of required qubits and two-qubit gates is shown. All results were obtained
using the minimal basis set STO-3G. Energies are in kJ/mol.
LiH
Etotal (HF)
Ecorr (CCSD)
Ecorr (CCSD(T))
Ecorr (FCI)
Ecorr (UCCSD-VQE)
# qubits
# two-qubit gates

-20642.0
-53.320
-53.342
-53.348
-53.320
12
1382

Li
∆FCI
−
0.028
0.006
0
0.028
−
−

-19206.9
-0.815
-0.815
-0.815
-0.815
10
464

NH3
∆FCI
−
0.000
0.000
0
0.000
−
−

-145594.2
-169.299
-169.618
-169.866
-169.400
14
5976

H2
∆FCI
−
0.567
0.248
0
0.466
−
−

-2931.8
-54.085
-54.085
-54.085
-54.085
4
56

CH2
∆FCI
−
0.000
0.000
0
0.000
−
−

-100745.6
-157.212
-157.759
-158.417
-157.491
12
1366

∆FCI
−
1.206
0.658
0
0.927
−
−

Table SI II. Accuracy of LiH molecular energies obtained with UCCSD-VQE for basis sets of increasing size (SV, DZ, TZ).
For further information see Table I in the SI. Energies are in kJ/mol.
SV
Etotal (HF)
Ecorr (CCSD)
Ecorr (CCSD(T))
Ecorr (FCI)
Ecorr (UCCSD-VQE)
# qubits
# two-qubit gates

-20905.7
-48.865
-48.868
-48.868
-48.865
10
1918

DZ
∆FCI
−
0.003
0.000
0
0.003
−
−

-20919.7
-89.208
-89.278
-89.292
-89.205
12
3096

TZ
∆FCI
−
0.083
0.013
0
0.087
−
−

-20926.4
-93.417
-93.497
-93.538
-93.413
18
9944

∆FCI
−
0.121
0.042
0
0.125
−
−

23

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

Figure SI 3. Extrapolated UCCSD-VQE correlation energies for a larger number of qubits. The extrapolation is done by
using CCSD correlation energies (worst-case estimates) in accordance with the results shown in Table I in the SI. Results are
depicted for molecules LiH (a), Li (b), NH3 (c), H2 (d) and CH2 (e) in combination with basis sets of increasing size (STO-3G,
cc-pVDZ, cc-pVTZ, cc-pVQZ and cc-pV5Z). For further information see Figure 2 in the SI.

24

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

Figure SI 4. Extrapolated UCCSD-VQE correlation energies for a larger number of qubits. The extrapolation is done by using
CCSD (worst-case estimate) and CCSD(T) (best-case estimate) correlation energies in accordance with the results shown in
Table I in the SI. For further information see Figure 3 in the SI.

Table SI III. Accuracy of reaction energies for the LiH-dissociation, LiH → Li + H, obtained with UCCSD-VQE for basis
sets of increasing size (SV, DZ, TZ). The HF, CCSD, CCSD(T), FCI and UCCSD-VQE reaction energies are given together
with the respective differences to the FCI reaction energy (∆FCI). All values are in kJ/mol.
SV
Ereact (HF)
Ereact (CCSD)
Ereact (CCSD(T))
Ereact (FCI)
Ereact (UCCSD-VQE)

100.347
149.034
149.038
149.038
149.035

DZ
∆FCI
-48.691
-0.003
0.000
0
-0.003

98.673
147.989
148.059
148.072
147.985

TZ
∆FCI
-49.399
-0.083
-0.013
0
-0.086

99.778
152.101
152.180
152.221
152.096

∆FCI
-52.443
-0.120
-0.040
0
-0.124

25
Table SI IV. Extrapolated UCCSD-VQE reaction energies for the LiH-dissociation, LiH → Li + H, along with corresponding
individual molecular energies for basis sets of increasing size (STO-3G, cc-pVDZ, cc-pVTZ, cc-pVQZ and cc-pV5Z). The
extrapolation is carried out by using CCSD energies (worst-case estimates) in accordance with the results shown in Table I
in the SI, as also done in Figures 3 and 4 in the SI. The obtained CCSD total energies are splitted into a HF total energy
contribution and a CCSD correlation energy contribution. For comparison, DFT reaction energies using the functionals BP86,
B3LYP and M06-2X are also shown. Additionally, the number of required qubits as well as the number of two-qubit gates are
estimated for the computationally most demanding system at a certain basis set quality (here LiH), see also the extrapolation
in Figure 9 in the main paper. All energies are in kJ/mol.
LiH

Li
H

Reaction

Reaction (DFT)

Etotal (HF)
Ecorr (CCSD)
Etotal (CCSD)
Etotal (HF)
Ecorr (CCSD)
Etotal (CCSD)
Etotal
Ereact, total (HF)
Ereact, corr (CCSD)
Ereact, total (CCSD)
# qubits
# two-qubit gates
Ereact, total (BP86)
Ereact, total (B3LYP)
Ereact, total (M06-2X)

STO-3G
-20642.0
-53.3
-20695.4
-19206.9
-0.8
-19207.7
-1225.0
210.1
52.5
262.6
12
1.5 · 103
327.6
321.2
311.2

cc-pVDZ
-20960.9
-81.5
-21042.5
-19513.8
-0.6
-19514.4
-1310.9
136.2
81.0
217.2
38
1.7 · 104
237.8
238.1
230.9

cc-pVTZ
-20968.9
-131.2
-21100.1
-19514.6
-35.0
-19549.6
-1312.3
142.1
96.2
238.3
88
8.3 · 104
243.3
243.6
238.4

cc-pVQZ
-20970.3
-145.4
-21115.7
-19514.6
-44.8
-19559.4
-1312.6
143.1
100.6
243.7
170
3.0 · 105
244.4
244.8
238.1

cc-pV5Z
-20970.7
-173.7
-21144.4
-19514.7
-71.2
-19585.9
-1312.7
143.3
102.5
245.8
292
8.5 · 105
244.3
244.6
237.3

Table SI V. Extrapolated UCCSD-VQE reaction energies for the Haber-Bosch process, N2 + 3 H2 → 2 NH3 , along with
corresponding individual molecular energies for basis sets of increasing size (STO-3G, cc-pVDZ, cc-pVTZ, cc-pVQZ and ccpV5Z). For further information see Table IV in the SI. The number of required qubits as well as the number of two-qubit gates
are estimated for the computationally most demanding system at a certain basis set quality (here NH3 ; in case of STO-3G
more qubits are required for N2 which is the only exception), see also the extrapolation in Figure 10 in the main paper. All
energies are in kJ/mol.
N2

H2

NH3

Reaction

Reaction (DFT)

Etotal (HF)
Ecorr (CCSD)
Etotal (CCSD)
Etotal (HF)
Ecorr (CCSD)
Etotal (CCSD)
Etotal (HF)
Etotal
Etotal (CCSD)
Ereact, total (HF)
Ereact, corr (CCSD)
Ereact, total (CCSD)
# qubits
# two-qubit gates
Ereact, total (BP86)
Ereact, total (B3LYP)
Ereact, total (M06-2X)

STO-3G
-282224.5
-395.5
-282620.0
-2931.8
-54.1
-2985.9
-145594.2
-169.3
-145763.5
-168.5
219.2
50.7
16
4.7 · 103
-83.6
-108.9
-118.4

cc-pVDZ
-286061.3
-807.7
-286869.0
-2963.4
-91.1
-3054.5
-147541.4
-531.5
-148072.9
-131.1
18.0
-113.1
56
3.6 · 105
-145.7
-141.6
-129.0

cc-pVTZ
-286139.5
-972.7
-287112.2
-2974.6
-103.4
-3078.0
-147600.0
-650.0
-148249.9
-136.7
-17.1
-153.9
142
2.7 · 106
-166.8
-158.6
-156.9

cc-pVQZ
-286159.7
-1028.6
-287188.3
-2975.9
-105.9
-3081.8
-147613.7
-685.8
-148299.5
-140.2
-25.1
-165.3
288
1.2 · 107
-175.0
-167.1
-163.7

cc-pV5Z
-286164.1
-1048.4
-287212.5
-2976.3
-106.7
-3082.9
-147618.0
-697.4
-148315.4
-143.2
-26.4
-169.5
510
3.8 · 107
-180.4
-172.6
-171.7

Table SI VI. Extrapolated UCCSD-VQE transition energies for the triplet-singlet transition in CH2 , :CH2 → CH2 , along
with corresponding individual molecular energies for basis sets of increasing size (STO-3G, cc-pVDZ, cc-pVTZ, cc-pVQZ and
cc-pV5Z). For further information see Table IV in the SI. The number of required qubits as well as the number of two-qubit
gates are estimated for :CH2 , see also the extrapolation in Figure 11 in the main paper. All energies are in kJ/mol.
:CH2

CH2

Reaction

Reaction (DFT)

Etotal (HF)
Ecorr (CCSD)
Etotal (CCSD)
Etotal (HF)
Ecorr (CCSD)
Etotal (CCSD)
Ereact, total (HF)
Ereact, corr (CCSD)
Ereact, total (CCSD)
# qubits
# two-qubit gates
Ereact, total (BP86)
Ereact, total (B3LYP)
Ereact, total (M06-2X)

STO-3G
-100909.4
-97.6
-101007.0
-100745.6
-157.2
-100902.8
163.7
-59.6
104.1
12
1.8 · 103
94.3
80.2
88.6

cc-pVDZ
-102201.8
-296.5
-102498.3
-102082.3
-362.6
-102444.9
119.5
-66.2
53.4
46
6.9 · 104
68.9
52.8
58.8

cc-pVTZ
-102230.7
-359.2
-102589.9
-102111.8
-431.2
-102543.0
118.9
-72.0
46.9
114
5.0 · 105
66.7
50.2
56.5

cc-pVQZ
-102237.2
-376.4
-102613.6
-102119.0
-450.2
-102569.2
118.1
-73.8
44.3
228
2.1 · 106
65.9
49.2
55.8

cc-pV5Z
-102238.8
-381.6
-102620.4
-102121.0
-456.0
-102577.0
117.8
-74.4
43.4
400
6.6 · 106
65.4
48.7
56.6

Table SI VII. Coordinates of H2 O obtained at the B3LYP/def2-QZVPP level.
O
H
H

0.0044960
0.9646713
-0.2330023

0.0057136
-0.0073990
0.9361335

0.0000000
0.0000000
0.0000000

26

Table SI VIII. Coordinates of OH obtained at the B3LYP/def2-QZVPP level.
O
H

-0.0062713
0.9674223

0.0000000
0.0000000

0.0000000
0.0000000

Table SI IX. Coordinates of LiH obtained at the B3LYP/def2-QZVPP level.
Li
H

-3.2319355
-1.6405907

1.1691641
1.1691641

0.0000000
0.0000000

Table SI X. Coordinates of N2 obtained at the B3LYP/def2-QZVPP level.
N
N

-4.2451484
-3.1862016

2.5760816
2.3168784

0.0000000
0.0000000

Table SI XI. Coordinates of H2 obtained at the B3LYP/def2-QZVPP level.
H
H

-4.0759023
-3.3554477

2.5346545
2.3583055

0.0000000
0.0000000

Table SI XII. Coordinates of NH3 obtained at the B3LYP/def2-QZVPP level.
N
H
H
H

-0.6800848
0.3314114
-0.9994515
-0.9993852

1.2693644
1.2772854
0.5770216
2.1717686

0.0227335
-0.0142918
-0.6429998
-0.3063819

Table SI XIII. Coordinates of :CH2 obtained at the B3LYP/def2-QZVPP level.
C
H
H

-2.8332513
-1.8294369
-3.8206119

0.6986016
1.0885324
1.1284960

0.0000000
0.0000000
0.0000000

Table SI XIV. Coordinates of CH2 obtained at the B3LYP/def2-QZVPP level.
C
H
H

-2.8371013
-1.9616221
-3.6845767

0.5067306
1.1871592
1.2217402

0.0000000
0.0000000
0.0000000

