                                                    Learning to Simulate Aerosol Dynamics with
                                                              Graph Neural Networks
                                                 Fabiana Ferracina1,2 , Payton Beeler1 , Mahantesh Halappanavar3 ,
                                                     Bala Krishnamoorthy2 , Marco Minutoli3 , Laura Fierce1*
                                                 1* Atmospheric, Climate, and Earth Sciences Division, Pacific Northwest




arXiv:2409.13861v1 [physics.ao-ph] 20 Sep 2024
                                                      National Laboratory, 902 Battelle Boulevard, Richland, 99352,
                                                                           Washington, USA.
                                                     2 Department of Mathematics and Statistics, Washington State

                                                       University, 14204 NE Salmon Creek Ave, Vancouver, 98686,
                                                                           Washington, USA.
                                                    3 Advanced Computing, Mathematics, and Data Division, Pacific

                                                   Northwest National Laboratory, 902 Battelle Boulevard, Richland,
                                                                        99352, Washington, USA.


                                                       *Corresponding author(s). E-mail(s): laura.fierce@pnnl.gov;
                                                           Contributing authors: fabiana.ferracina@wsu.edu;
                                                          payton.beeler@pnnl.gov; hala@pnnl.gov; kbala@wsu;
                                                                       marco.minutoli@pnnl.gov;


                                                                                      Abstract
                                                   Aerosol effects on climate, weather, and air quality depend on characteristics of
                                                   individual particles, which are tremendously diverse and change in time. Particle-
                                                   resolved models are the only models able to capture this diversity in particle
                                                   physiochemical properties, and these models are computationally expensive. As
                                                   a strategy for accelerating particle-resolved microphysics models, we introduce
                                                   Graph-based Learning of Aerosol Dynamics (GLAD) and use this model to train
                                                   a surrogate of the particle-resolved model PartMC-MOSAIC. GLAD implements
                                                   a Graph Network-based Simulator (GNS), a machine learning framework that
                                                   has been used to simulate particle-based fluid dynamics models. In GLAD, each
                                                   particle is represented as a node in a graph, and the evolution of the particle
                                                   population over time is simulated through learned message passing. We demon-
                                                   strate our GNS approach on a simple aerosol system that includes condensation
                                                   of sulfuric acid onto particles composed of sulfate, black carbon, organic carbon,
                                                   and water. A graph with particles as nodes is constructed, and a graph neural


                                                                                           1
     network (GNN) is then trained using the model output from PartMC-MOSAIC.
     The trained GNN can then be used for simulating and predicting aerosol dynam-
     ics over time. Results demonstrate the framework’s ability to accurately learn
     chemical dynamics and generalize across different scenarios, achieving efficient
     training and prediction times. We evaluate the performance across three scenar-
     ios, highlighting the framework’s robustness and adaptability in modeling aerosol
     microphysics and chemistry.




1 Introduction
Aerosol particles, which are solid or liquid particles suspended in a gas, are a large
source of uncertainty in understanding human impacts on climate (Masson-Delmotte
et al., 2021; Stier et al., 2013). Particles influence Earth’s energy balance directly by
scattering and absorbing solar radiation (Chung et al., 2005; Bellouin et al., 2005)
and indirectly by modifying the reflectivity and lifetime of clouds (Twomey, 1977;
Albrecht, 1989; Rosenfeld et al., 2008). A particle’s optical properties and its ability
to cloud droplets or ice crystals depends on its size, shape, and chemical composition.
Atmospheric aerosol particles exhibit tremendous variability in these particle-level
characteristics (Schwarz et al., 2008; Healy et al., 2014; Gautam et al., 2024, e.g.). This
particle-to-particle variability in physiochemical properties impacts climate-relevant
aerosol properties, but is not easily represented in models (Riemer et al., 2019).
    Particle-resolved models have emerged as a modeling strategy for simulating the
evolution of complex particle distributions (Riemer et al., 2009; Shima et al., 2009,
e.g.). The Particle Monte Carlo Model for Simulating Aerosol Interactions and Chem-
istry (PartMC-MOSAIC) (Riemer et al., 2009; Zaveri et al., 2008) tracks the size and
composition of individual Monte Carlo particles as they evolve during transport. Sim-
ilar Monte Carlo approaches have emerged for simulations of cloud particles, often
implemented using the Super Droplet method introduced by Shima et al. (2009).
    Although particle-resolved models of aerosol and cloud particles have elucidated
the role of small-scale processes on large-scale aerosol and cloud effects (Grabowski
and Abade, 2017; Fierce et al., 2017; Riemer et al., 2019; Fierce et al., 2020; Morrison
et al., 2020; Zheng et al., 2021; Fierce et al., 2024, e.g.), these detailed models are com-
putationally expensive. To accurately represent multivariate aerosol size-composition
distributions, PartMC-MOSAIC must track the evolution of 104 –106 particles that
interact with each other and with co-simulated trace gases.
    As a strategy to accelerate particle-resolved models, we introduce Graph-based
Learning of Aerosol Dynamics (GLAD), a novel graph neural network (GNN) approach
for learning aerosol dynamics on a per-particle level. Once the behavior is learned and
represented on a graph, we can use this graph to simulate aerosol particle microphysics
and chemistry. By encoding aerosol systems as graphs, with particles represented as
nodes and interactions represented as edges, GNNs can capture spatial and temporal
dependencies between particles and their interactions with the environment.
    The GLAD framework builds on previous approaches that apply GNNs and graph
network simulators (GNS) to represent multiscale interactions. For example, GNNs


                                             2
have been used to simulate molecular dynamics, where they predict the behavior of
particles over time by learning from the interactions within the system Battaglia et al.
(2016). In chemistry, GNNs have found applications in predicting molecular properties
and reactions. By representing molecules as graphs, where atoms are nodes and bonds
are edges, GNNs can learn to predict properties such as molecular energy, stability, and
reactivity Gilmer et al. (2017). For example, GNNs have been utilized to predict the
outcomes of chemical reactions, aiding in the design of new compounds with desired
properties Schütt et al. (2017).
    The development of graph network simulators (GNS) for modeling complex phys-
ical systems offer new possibilities for simulating dynamic interactions in evolving
systems. Sanchez-Gonzalez et al. (2020) introduced a framework that utilizes GNNs
to simulate physical interactions, demonstrating the capability of GNNs to accurately
model dynamics in particle-based systems by representing particles as nodes and inter-
actions as edges. Building on this foundational work, Kumar and Vantassel (2022)
developed the Generalizable Graph Neural Network-based Simulator, which extends
the principles of GNNs to more generalizable and scalable simulations for particu-
late and fluid modeling. Their approach leverages the inherent flexibility of GNNs to
handle different types of interactions and scales, making it particularly suitable for
modeling complex systems like aerosols.
    The GLAD framework introduced here leverages GNS in a new way to accelerate
particle-resolved simulations of aerosol dynamics. As a proof of concept, we focus on
an idealized aerosol system consisting of sulfuric acid condensation onto black and
organic particles and the subsequent water uptake. We hope to extend this approach
to more complex particle systems in the future, which will make it possible to simulate
more particles, to incorporate more complete representation of complex processes, and
to perform the large simulation ensembles needed to train machine learning models
for large-scale atmospheric models.

2 Approach
Our approach leverages the capabilities of Graph Neural Networks to address the chal-
lenging and computationally expensive modeling of particle dynamics. By representing
aerosol particles along with their chemical compositions (nodes) and their similarities
and interactions (edges) as a graph, we aim to improve the computational efficiency
of aerosol microphysics and chemistry simulations.

2.1 Simulating dynamics with GNNs
GNNs have emerged as a powerful tool for modeling and analyzing data with inherent
graph structures. They extend traditional neural networks by incorporating graph-
based data, allowing for the effective learning of representations that capture relational
information Scarselli et al. (2008). GNNs have been successfully applied across various
domains, including social networks, biology, and physics, where data naturally form
graph structures Wu et al. (2020).
    GNNs consist of multiple layers, each processing information from neighboring
nodes and edges to update node, edge or global representations. Their architecture


                                            3
typically includes message passing mechanisms, aggregation functions, and learnable
parameters. The neural networks can operate on both homogeneous and heterogeneous
graphs, capturing complex relationships between entities in the graph structure (Wu
et al., 2020). By iteratively aggregating information from neighboring nodes and edges,
GNNs can learn representations that encode the structural and semantic properties of
the graph. Training involves optimizing the parameters of the network to minimize a
predefined loss function, with objectives ranging from node classification to graph-level
prediction tasks. Recent advancements in GNN architectures, such as message passing
neural networks and attention mechanisms, have further enhanced their capability
to model complex graph-based data Veličković et al. (2017). These innovations have
improved the accuracy and scalability of GNNs, making them a valuable tool in both
microphysics and chemistry research.
    Simulators built with neural networks, particularly Graph Neural Networks
(GNNs), have shown significant promise in various domains due to their ability to
model complex systems with relational data structures. The operation of a graph net-
work simulator involves training a graph neural network (GNN) on historical data to
learn the underlying dynamics of the system. During training, the parameters of the
neural network are optimized using gradient-based algorithms to minimize a specified
loss function, which measures the disparity between the predicted and actual values
of the target variables (Wu et al., 2020). Once trained, the GNN can simulate the
dynamic evolution of the system over time by iteratively updating the states of the
nodes and edges based on the learned relationships encoded in its parameters. This
iterative updating allows the model to capture and predict complex temporal changes
within the system (Sanchez-Gonzalez et al., 2020).



2.2 Procedure for training and using GNS of aerosol dynamics
The GNS framework uses graph neural networks for learning to simulate the chemical
composition changes going on within the particles. Our GNN uses an Encode-Process-
Decode architecture with a step to pre-process the data before it is fed into the encoder
and a step to post-process the data after it is output by the decoder.



2.2.1 Pre-processing
Pre-processing involves computing the rate of change in mass or concentration for
each chemical in the particle or gas in the system, over two time steps, that is ∆mC =
(mC      C                           C
   t −mt−1 )/(t−(t−1)). These ∆m ’s along particle properties p, which are properties
that differ by particle but do not vary with time, as well as masses (or concentrations)
differences from the known minima and maxima, are combined in the node data of
our GNN. This means that each node is a particle who holds information about its
own specific properties, and of its mass changes over time.
    We connect our network nodes using their Euclidean distance to two closest neigh-
bors in the chemical composition space. The chemical composition space refers to the
multi-dimensional space where each dimension represents the concentration or amount


                                           4
of a particular element or compound within a mixture or material. Although, not usu-
ally an Euclidean space, through some care we may consider the composition space as
locally Euclidean:
- When considering small variations in composition, the space can be approximated
  as Euclidean. For instance, in a quaternary system (four elements), the composition
  space is a tetrahedron. Within a small region of this tetrahedron, changes in com-
  position can be linearly interpolated, and distances can be measured using standard
  Euclidean metrics.
- For a system with n components, the composition can be represented in an (n − 1)-
  dimensional simplex. For example, for a ternary system, this is a 2-dimensional
  triangle, and for a quaternary system, this is a 3-dimensional tetrahedron. Within
  small regions of these simplices, the space can be treated as locally Euclidean.
- If the chemical composition space is embedded in a metric space where distances
  between points (compositions) are defined in a way that obeys Euclidean properties
  (e.g., using the Euclidean distance formula), then locally, the space can behave like
  a Euclidean space.
    In the pre-processing step, we also combine data that will serve as edge representa-
tion. Specifically, we store in the edge structure information on the displacement and
ℓ2 distances between the two nodes which the edge connects.

2.2.2 Encode-Process-Decode Architecture
Once the pre-processing is done, we can move to the Encode step. The Encoder is an
embedding function that takes the chemistry-state representations on the nodes and
edges, X and assigns them to a latent graph G0 . We denote the graph as Gm = (V, E)
with vertices vi = fv (xi ) ∈ V and edges ei,j = fe (di,j ) ∈ E. The functions fv and fe
are learned functions that embed the particle chemistry information (xi , di,j ) into the
latent nodes and edges respectively.
    The Process phase is when interactions amongst the connected nodes occur through
a sequence of M message-passing steps. In this phase, the Processor takes G0 as
its input, computes (G1 , . . . , GM ), and outputs the final GM . In each graph of the
sequence, messages (rules and constraints) are propagated, information is aggregated,
and nodes and edges are updated. The interaction network starts with learning the
message embeddings on the nodes. In general, for node i, we have:
                                                                   
                                      M
                        m  m−1
                  xm                           ϕm xm−1 , xm−1
                                                                   
                   i =ξ    xi   ,                  i      j   , ej,i  ,             (1)
                                     j∈N (i)


where the features xmi are updated through a differentiable function ξ
                                                                       m
                                                                         (e.g. a multi-
layer perceptron as in our case). The updates takes the features for node i from graph
m − 1 and combines them with new information using some sort of aggregator such
as sum. For all other nodes j in i’s neighborhood, apply a differentiable function ϕm
which specifies how the information in node i will combine with those of nodes j and
the respective edges ej,i ’s that connect them.


                                               5
    Once all message passing steps have been performed, the output graph GM is given
to the Decoder. The Decode phase involves converting the latent graph representation
GM back into the original space of particle properties. Note that we do not decode the
edges as we wish to learn only node representations given our framework. The node
contains the chemistry information, while the edges are simply tracking the particles
proximity in chemical composition space. The Decoder computes:

                                      ŷi = δ v (viM ),

where δ v is a learned function that maps the latent node representation back to the
predicted property ŷi . In our framework, the dynamics extracted from the nodes,
pertain to how fast the changes in masses or concentrations are occurring within each
particle. After decoding, we compute the loss between the predicted rates and the
target rates - target rates are computed using an Inverse Decoder from the ground-
truth masses and concentrations. After training for several steps to minimize the loss,
the post-processing of the predicted rates involves Euler integration to obtain the
predicted masses and concentrations.
    Figure 1 illustrates the architecture of a Graph Neural Network (GNN) designed
for simulating aerosol microphysics. The process involves several key stages: input
preprocessing, encoding, message passing, processing, decoding, and output postpro-
cessing. The input data, consisting of various aerosol particles and their properties
(e.g., ∆SO4 , ∆H2 O, ∆H2 SO4 - the rates of change in mass and concentration of each
chemical species), are normalized and preprocessed. Each particle is further character-
ized by parameters such as type, chemical species’ mass (or concentration) distances to
minimum and maximum values (dmin , dmax ), black carbon mass (BC), organic carbon
mass (OC), and aerosol number concentration (N).
    The system constructs a graph where each node (v1 , v2 , v3 ) represents a particle or a
state, and edges (e12 , e13 , e23 ) - added to the graph by a k-nearest neighbors algorithm
- represent the Euclidean distance (i.e. ||vi − vj ||2 ) and displacement between all mass
and concentration (e.g. (SO4 )vi − (SO4 )vj ) quantities represented by the nodes. These
input features are encoded using Multi-Layer Perceptrons (MLPs) for both nodes and
edges, transforming them into a format suitable for processing within the GNN.
    In the message passing phase, information is exchanged between nodes through
edges. This step involves building messages, forwarding them along the edges, and
aggregating information at each node. The process is iteratively applied across layers
to capture complex interactions. The encoded data undergoes processing in Layer 1,
where node and edge features are updated using MLPs. Activation functions such as
Parametric ReLU (PReLU) are applied to introduce non-linearity.
    The processed information is then decoded back into the original feature space
using MLPs. This step translates the learned representations into predictions for the
aerosol properties. The output data is post-processed to predict new quantities and
compute the loss for model training. The predicted properties are compared to the
target values to refine the model through backpropagation, which involves adjusting
the weights of the network based on the computed loss, optimizing the model to
improve accuracy in predicting aerosol microphysical properties.


                                             6
Fig. 1: Architecture of a Graph Neural Network (GNN) for aerosol microphysics sim-
ulation. The process begins with input data normalization and preprocessing, followed
by encoding using Multi-Layer Perceptrons (MLPs) for nodes and edges. Message pass-
ing is performed to exchange information between nodes, which is processed through
multiple layers with activation functions like PReLU. The data is then decoded back
into the original feature space, post-processed to predict new quantities, and refined
through backpropagation to optimize model accuracy.



2.2.3 Simulating Aerosol Dynamics with a Learned Graph Network
Once the GNN is trained, it is then used as a simulator to predict aerosol micro-
physical dynamics iteratively. Figure 2 illustrates the integration of a Graph Neural
Network (GNN) within a graph network simulator (GNS) designed to predict aerosol
microphysics over time. The GNN acts as the core computational engine, enabling the
simulation of complex interactions between aerosol particles.
    The simulator employs a learned update mechanism, denoted as dθ , to iteratively
refine predictions. This mechanism adjusts the state of the system based on the GNN’s
output, ensuring accurate simulation of aerosol dynamics over time. The final out-
put provides predictions of mass and concentration trajectories for various chemical


                                          7
Fig. 2: Schematics of our graph network simulator. This figure was adapted from
Sanchez-Gonzalez et al. (2020) to depict our GNS framework. The first row shows the
progress of the simulated data through time. At each time step the learned simulator
is called to predict the next time step. The learned simulator is a pre-trained GNN
using the Encode-Process-Decode scheme as shown in Figure 1.


species present in the aerosol particles, which are visualized over time. The simulator
incorporates a feedback loop, using these predictions to update the graph and improve
subsequent iterations.

2.3 Target application: GNS surrogate of PartMC-MOSAIC
We explore our GNS framework for aerosol dynamics with using data simulated by
PartMC-MOSAIC. We explore a simple system where H2 SO4 condenses on particles
containing SO4 , black carbon (BC), organic carbon (OC) and H2 O. Within PartMC-
MOSAIC, we simulate multiple 24-hour scenarios in which the initial concentrations
of H2 SO4 and total number concentration of particles were varied among scenarios.
Data was recorded every 600 seconds, giving us a total of 144 time steps in which
the gas interacts with the particles. The environmental properties are kept constant
with relative humidity set to 95%, temperature set to 293.15 K, and pressure set to
101325 Pa.
    For each scenario, we train the GNS using the per-particle mass of OC, BC, SO4 ,
and H2 O, the number concentration associated with each computational particle, and
the concentration of H2 SO4 . In these condensation-only scenarios, the particle number
concentration, OC mass, and BC mass do not vary over time and, in our framework,
are treated as “material properties” of the particles. On the other hand, H2 SO4 varies
with time but does not vary among particles, such that each particle “sees” the same
concentration of H2 SO4 at a time.
    Data from PartMC-MOSAIC is processed through our data preparation pipeline.
Once the information has been loaded, each array is determined to be either a “mate-
rial property” - a feature that does not change with time, but differs per particle, or


                                          8
a time changing feature which may or may not vary per particle. We can also specify
“particle types” which can be used to encode a categorical characteristic for a par-
ticle such as CCN active or not, for instance, though this feature is not applied the
examples presented here. For each scenario simulated in PartMC-MOSAIC, we assign
a categorical variable (called “universe number”) which is used by the algorithm to
learn the differences between the scenarios.
    Before taking the simulation data into our framework, we perform a data trans-
formation step where gas concentrations are placed on a logarithmic scale and all
quantities are normalized to fall in the [0, 1] interval. We also split the dataset into
training, testing and validation scenarios. The splits can be determined as desired, but
for the examples shown in our experiments we use a 60/30/10 train/test/validation
split.



2.4 Implementation Details
As in the work of Sanchez-Gonzalez et al. (2020) and Kumar and Vantassel (2022),
our GNS uses standard neural networks and k-nearest neighbors (k-NN) algorithms
as building blocks. We use PyTorch (Paszke et al., 2019) and PyTorch Geometric (Fey
and Lenssen, 2019) classes and functions for these purposes.
    As aforementioned, particle’s input are a sequence of per-particle masses of con-
stituent aerosol species or gas concentrations, which are used to compute the rate of
change in these quantities over each time step. We also include particle features that
do not change over time, so called “material properties”. Unlike previous GNS imple-
mentations, our GNS framework is designed to operate in beyond a three-dimensional
space. In our case, both the time-changing and material property features can be
arrays of arbitrary dimensions. We also add a novel global categorical variable called
“universe number”, which represents the particles’ scenario conditions.
    Our Encoder constructs a k-NN graph with k = 2, that is each particle is con-
nected to the nearest 2 neighbors in the chemical composition domain, with necessary
transformations applied so that we could use Euclidean distances. The data contained
in nodes and edges are encoded as 2-hidden-layer perceptrons (MLP) with parametric
rectified linear unit functions PReLU(x; a) = max(0, x) + a ∗ min(0, x) applied at each
of 256 channels, that learns the embeddings.
    The Processor performs M = 1 message passing step, which means that the inter-
action network contains one message exchange between each of the nodes and their
neighbors (and the edge that connects them). Both k and M are parameters on
which we experimented for performance improvements. Messages are combined and
exchanged with the same MLP from the Encoder, and are aggregated via addition.
    Our Decoder is an alternative 2-hidden-layer perceptron whose activation func-
tions are the regular non-parametric ReLU, that is δ v (x) = max(0, x). After being
decoded, the data represent the dynamics of chemical compositions of each particle.
The predicted compositions are obtained using an Euler integrator.
    As in Sanchez-Gonzalez et al. (2020)’s work, we implement training noise to mit-
igate error accumulation over the rollouts. The “ground-truth” input data, which is
PartMC-MOSAIC simulated data is not corrupted by noise. However, as our model


                                           9
predicts each time step based on its previous predictions, substantial error accumula-
tion can occur. Mitigating this accumulation involves introducing noise to the training
data. After computing the rates of changes, we add a random-walk noise that is dis-
tributed normally as N (µ = 0, σ = 6.3 × 10−5 ), thus making the training distribution
closer to the distribution generated from rollouts.
    We also standardize all input and target vectors with means and standard devia-
tions summarized from the training dataset. Without this transformation, we noticed
poor performance due to the large mean and variability ranges of the multi-dimensional
chemical composition space.
    Loss at training was computed by comparing the predicted per-particle dynamics
with target ones obtained from the ground-truth data. We use a multi-output mean
squared error function to compute this loss:
                                         N    D
                                     1 XX                   2
                           LMSE =              (yij − ŷij ) ,                      (2)
                                     N i=1 j=1

where N is the total number of particles, D is the total number of dimensions (i.e.
chemistry in the particles), yij is the target rate of chemical change based on ground-
truth data, and ŷij is the predicted rate of chemical change.
    We minimize this loss using the Adam optimization algorithm. Adam, which stands
for Adaptive Moment Estimation, computes individual adaptive learning rates for dif-
ferent parameters by estimating the first moment (mean) and the second moment
(uncentered variance) of the gradients (Kingma and Ba, 2014). We set an initial learn-
ing rate of 5 × 10−5 and perform a total of 6300 gradient update steps, 300 steps at a
time, for each available scenario.

3 Results and Discussion
Our main findings are that a physics-based GNS can be adapted to work in multi-
dimensional chemical composition space, and it can learn accurate chemistry dynamics
information from just the initial values. It is generalizable to different scenarios and
conditions for the same simple system of sulfuric acid condensation. Although the
system used here is simple, so is our GNS, which does not specify any formulas or
constraints on how the particles should behave.
    Our GNS is also efficient. Training on GPU usually took less than 12 seconds
when using three aggregated scenarios with a total of 7267 particles and performing
200 training steps, while testing and prediction time was always under 1 second for
all the results presented here. The GNS framework is also quite modular, allowing
for many of the parameters and hyperparameters to be set as appropriate or tuned
differently. This allowed us to quickly experiment with different inputs to obtain the
better performance.

3.1 Demonstrating performance with three example scenarios
The results presented here are for three testing scenarios which were predicted using
a model trained on three aggregated training scenarios. Each scenario has different


                                             10
         Scenarios             Total # particles    Initial H2 SO4 Concentration (ppb)
         Training Scenario 1         1975                          2.3153
         Training Scenario 2         2315                          1.9610
         Training Scenario 3         2977                          4.3907
         Testing Scenario 1          2019                          5.7245
         Testing Scenario 2          2829                          9.2196
         Testing Scenario 3          3821                          9.9237
         Table 1: Total number of particles and initial H2 SO4 concentra-
         tions in each of the scenarios presented here.


          Scenarios            # particles   LMSE      SO4 NMAE       H2 SO4 NMAE
          Testing Scenario 1     2019        0.0495      0.1347           0.2660
          Testing Scenario 2     2829        0.0211      0.0494           0.3632
          Testing Scenario 3     3821        0.0003      0.1285           0.2270
          Table 2: Results for a subset three of the nine scenarios tested.
          NMAE is the normalized mean absolute error between the pre-
          diction and the ground-truth data (PartMC-MOSAIC simulated
          data). SO4 ’s NMAE is between masses in kg, H2 SO4 ’s NMAE is
          between concentrations in ppb.


initial conditions, and the trained model has no apriori knowledge of the testing sce-
narios’ initial conditions. Although neural networks work best on predicting scenarios
whose initial conditions have already been learned, we wanted to test our model’s
performance on examples spawned from completely novel conditions. Scenario input
parameters are summarized in Table 1, and the performance measures for each sce-
nario are provided in Table 2. Accuracy of per-particle properties is quantified as the
normalized mean absolute error (NMAE), defined as:
                                             m   Pn
                                  1 X                 |y − ŷij |
                           NMAE =                  Pn ij
                                                  i=1
                                                                  ,                      (3)
                                  m j=1              i=1 |yij |


where y = yij and ŷ = ŷij are the true and predicted vectors, respectively, each of
size n, the number of time steps by m, the number of particles.

3.2 Per-particle composition and trace gases over time
As illustrated by Figure 3, the GLAD model accurately predicts per-particle SO4 and
H2 O, as well as the corresponding concentration in H2 SO4 in the first 4 to 6 hours
- this is impressive given its small initial condition corpus of knowledge. In both the
particle-resolved and GLAD model, the mass of SO4 in individual particles as H2SO4
partitions to the particle phase, corresponding to a decrease in the concentration of
H2 SO4 gas. The increase in per-particle SO4 mass leads to an increase in the mass of
water taken up by particles, again in both the PartMC-MOSAIC simulation and in
the learned GNS model.
    While the model performs well overall in all scenarios, slight discrepancies at the
extremes of the size range highlight areas for potential improvement. The SO4 mass


                                             11
Fig. 3: Comparison between “ground-truth” data (PartMC-MOSAIC accepted simu-
lation results) and our GNS simulation for each scenario’s SO4 and H2 O masses in µg,
and H2 SO4 concentration in ppb. Each line represents the chemical mass/concentra-
tion trajectory for each particle over time for 24 hours. Trajectories where predicted
using the first two masses/concentrations of each chemical for each particle.


fraction ranges predominantly between 0.4 and 1.0 in all three scenarios, providing
insight into the typical composition of these aerosol particles under the studied con-
ditions. These observations underscore the complex interplay between particle size,
composition, and atmospheric processing, while also demonstrating the efficacy of our
predictive model in capturing these intricate dynamics.

3.3 Evolution of the aerosol size distribution
With such accurate predictions in per-particle properties during early dynamics, it is
unsurprising that the GLAD framework predicts the initial evolution of the aerosol
size distribution nearly perfect accuracy in comparison with PartMC-MOSAIC (see
Figure 5). The size distribution at different points in time (0 hr, 2 hrs, and 4 hrs)
are shown for the three example scenarios, shown for the true PartMC-MOSAIC
simulations (solid red lines) and the GLAD predictions (dashed black lines).


4 Conclusion
This study demonstrates the effectiveness of a physics-based Graph Neural Network
(GNN) approach in modeling multi-dimensional chemical composition dynamics in


                                         12
Fig. 4: Comparison of true and predicted SO4 mass fraction versus total dry diameter
for aerosol particles over time for all three scenarios. The left panels show the true
values for each scenario, while the right panels displays their respective predicted
values. Each color represents a different time point ranging from 0 to 24 hours. The
x-axis shows the total dry diameter in µm on a logarithmic scale, and the y-axis
represents the SO4 mass fraction.


aerosols. By adapting the Graph Network Simulator (GNS) framework to work with
chemical composition space, we have shown that accurate chemistry dynamics informa-
tion can be learned from initial conditions alone, without specifying explicit formulas
or constraints on particle behavior.
    Our GNS framework, applied to a simple system of sulfuric acid condensation,
exhibits several key strengths:
- Accuracy and efficiency: The model demonstrates relatively high accuracy across
  different scenarios it has never seen before. Although predictions diverge from truth
  over time, this divergence can be made smaller as the model’s knowledge corpus
  grows. Training times are notably efficient, typically requiring approximately 12
  seconds for 200 training steps to learn the chemistry dynamics of 7267 particles over


                                          13
Fig. 5: Comparison of true and predicted total diameter density distributions across
three scenarios at different time intervals (0 hr, 2 hrs, and 4 hrs). Solid lines represent
true distributions, while dashed lines indicate predictions by the simulator. Each row
corresponds to a different scenario, demonstrating the model’s ability to accurately
capture aerosol dynamics over time.




  a 24 hours period (on GPU), while testing and prediction times consistently remain
  under 1 second.
- Generalizability: The framework shows robust performance across various scenarios
  with different initial concentrations of H2 SO4 and total number of particles, indi-
  cating its ability to adapt to diverse environmental conditions within the studied
  system.
- Flexibility: The modular nature of the GNS allows for easy adjustment of parame-
  ters and hyperparameters, facilitating rapid experimentation and optimization for
  different input conditions.
   The comparison between true and predicted SO4 mass fractions across different
scenarios demonstrates the model’s ability to capture complex relationships between
particle size, composition, and temporal evolution. The striking similarities between
true and predicted plots, particularly in representing the inverse relationship between


                                            14
particle size and SO4 mass fraction, underscore the model’s efficacy in simulating
intricate aerosol dynamics.
    As for future work, several promising directions emerge, such as
- Incorporating global nodes could provide a more efficient representation of uniform
  properties like H2 SO4 concentration, potentially improving the model’s performance
  and computational efficiency.
- Exploring distance functions beyond Euclidean, such as Mahalanobis or cosine dis-
  tances, may offer better representations of the complex relationships in chemical
  composition space, potentially leading to improved model performance and deeper
  insights into underlying chemical processes.
- Extending the framework to more complex aerosol systems with additional chemical
  species and processes would test the limits of the GNS approach and potentially
  broaden its applicability in atmospheric microphysics and chemistry modeling.
    Further investigation into optimal parameter settings could also yield improve-
ments in prediction accuracy, particularly for scenarios that currently show higher
prediction errors. In conclusion, this study presents a significant step forward in the
application of machine learning techniques to aerosol microphysics and chemistry
modeling. The demonstrated ability of GLAD - our GNS framework - to accurately
and efficiently simulate aerosol dynamics opens up new possibilities for understand-
ing and predicting atmospheric processes. As we continue to refine and expand this
approach, we anticipate that it will become an increasingly valuable tool in the study
of atmospheric chemistry and climate science, offering new insights into the complex
interactions that shape our environment.

Data availability
The GLAD package is available at github.com/fabstat/glad. The repository also
includes the PartMC-MOSAIC data that was used for training, validation, and test-
ing, as well as the example test cases and plotting scripts. PartMC is available at
https://github.com/compdyn/partmc, and MOSAIC is available from Rahul Zaveri
(rahul.zaveri@pnnl.gov).

Acknowledgements
The study was supported through the Laboratory Directed Research and Development
program of Pacific Northwest National Laboratory (PNNL). PNNL is operated for the
DOE by the Battelle Memorial Institute under Contract DE-AC05-76RL01830.


References
Albrecht, B.A.: Aerosols, cloud microphysics, and fractional cloudiness. Science
  245(4923), 1227–1230 (1989) https://doi.org/10.1126/science.245.4923.1227

Bellouin, N., Boucher, O., Haywood, J., Reddy, M.S.: Global estimate of aerosol direct
  radiative forcing from satellite measurements. Nature 438(7071), 1138–1141 (2005)


                                          15
Battaglia, P., Pascanu, R., Lai, M., Jimenez Rezende, D., et al.: Interaction networks
  for learning about objects, relations and physics. Advances in neural information
  processing systems 29 (2016)

Chung, C.E., Ramanathan, V., Kim, D., Podgorny, I.: Global anthropogenic aerosol
  direct forcing derived from satellite and ground-based observations. Journal of
  Geophysical Research: Atmospheres 110(D24) (2005)

Fey, M., Lenssen, J.E.: Fast graph representation learning with pytorch geometric.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1903.02428 (2019)

Fierce, L., Onasch, T.B., Cappa, C.D., Mazzoleni, C., China, S., Bhandari, J., Davi-
  dovits, P., Fischer, D.A., Helgestad, T., Lambe, A.T., et al.: Radiative absorption
  enhancements by black carbon controlled by particle-to-particle heterogeneity in
  composition. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 117(10), 5196–5203
  (2020)

Fierce, L., Riemer, N., Bond, T.C.: Toward reduced representation of mixing state
  for simulating aerosol effects on climate. Bulletin of the American Meteorological
  Society 98(5), 971–980 (2017)

Fierce, L., Yao, Y., Easter, R., Ma, P.-L., Sun, J., Wan, H., Zhang, K.: Quantifying
  structural errors in cloud condensation nuclei activity from reduced representation
  of aerosol size distributions. Journal of Aerosol Science, 106388 (2024)

Grabowski, W.W., Abade, G.C.: Broadening of cloud droplet spectra through eddy
  hopping: Turbulent adiabatic parcel simulations. Journal of the Atmospheric
  Sciences 74(5), 1485–1493 (2017) https://doi.org/10.1175/JAS-D-17-0043.1

Gilmer, J., Schoenholz, S.S., Riley, P.F., Vinyals, O., Dahl, G.E.: Neural message
  passing for quantum chemistry. In: International Conference on Machine Learning,
  pp. 1263–1272 (2017). PMLR

Gautam, T., Vandergrift, G.W., Lata, N.N., Cheng, Z., Rahman, A., Minke, A., Lai,
 Z., Dexheimer, D.N., Zhang, D., Marcus, M.A., et al.: Chemical insights into the
 molecular composition of organic aerosols in the urban region of houston, texas.
 ACS ES&T Air (2024)

Healy, R.M., Riemer, N., Wenger, J.C., Murphy, M., West, M., Poulain, L., Wieden-
  sohler, A., O’Connor, I.P., McGillicuddy, E., Sodeau, J.R., et al.: Single particle
  diversity and mixing state measurements. Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics
  14(12), 6289–6299 (2014)

Kingma, D.P., Ba, J.: Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1412.6980 (2014)

Kumar, K., Vantassel, J.: Gns: A generalizable graph neural network-based simulator


                                         16
  for particulate and fluid modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.10228 (2022)

Masson-Delmotte, V., Zhai, P., Pirani, A., Connors, S.L., Péan, C., Berger, S., Caud,
 N., Chen, Y., Goldfarb, L., Gomis, M., et al.: Climate change 2021: the physical
 science basis. Contribution of working group I to the sixth assessment report of the
 intergovernmental panel on climate change 2 (2021)

Morrison, H., Lier-Walqui, M., Fridlind, A.M., Grabowski, W.W., Harrington, J.Y.,
 Hoose, C., Korolev, A., Kumjian, M.R., Milbrandt, J.A., Pawlowska, H., et al.:
 Confronting the challenge of modeling cloud and precipitation microphysics. Journal
 of advances in modeling earth systems 12(8), 2019–001689 (2020)

Paszke, A., Gross, S., Massa, F., Lerer, A., Bradbury, J., Chanan, G., Killeen, T., Lin,
  Z., Gimelshein, N., Antiga, L., et al.: Pytorch: An imperative style, high-performance
  deep learning library. Advances in neural information processing systems 32 (2019)

Riemer, N., Ault, A., West, M., Craig, R., Curtis, J.: Aerosol mixing state: Measure-
  ments, modeling, and impacts. Reviews of Geophysics 57(2), 187–249 (2019)

Rosenfeld, D., Lohmann, U., Raga, G.B., O’Dowd, C.D., Kulmala, M., Fuzzi, S., Reis-
  sell, A., Andreae, M.O.: Flood or drought: how do aerosols affect precipitation?
  science 321(5894), 1309–1313 (2008) https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1160606

Riemer, N., West, M., Zaveri, R.A., Easter, R.C.: Simulating the evolution of soot mix-
  ing state with a particle-resolved aerosol model. Journal of Geophysical Research:
  Atmospheres 114(D9) (2009)

Schütt, K.T., Arbabzadah, F., Chmiela, S., Müller, K.R., Tkatchenko, A.: Quantum-
  chemical insights from deep tensor neural networks. Nature communications 8(1),
  13890 (2017)

Sanchez-Gonzalez, A., Godwin, J., Pfaff, T., Ying, R., Leskovec, J., Battaglia, P.:
  Learning to simulate complex physics with graph networks. In: International
  Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 8459–8468 (2020). PMLR

Schwarz, J.P., Gao, R., Spackman, J., Watts, L., Thomson, D., Fahey, D., Ryerson,
  T., Peischl, J., Holloway, J., Trainer, M., et al.: Measurement of the mixing state,
  mass, and optical size of individual black carbon particles in urban and biomass
  burning emissions. Geophysical Research Letters 35(13) (2008)

Scarselli, F., Gori, M., Tsoi, A.C., Hagenbuchner, M., Monfardini, G.: The graph
  neural network model. IEEE transactions on neural networks 20(1), 61–80 (2008)

Shima, S.-i., Kusano, K., Kawano, A., Sugiyama, T., Kawahara, S.: The super-droplet
  method for the numerical simulation of clouds and precipitation: A particle-based
  and probabilistic microphysics model coupled with a non-hydrostatic model. Quar-
  terly Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society: A journal of the atmospheric


                                          17
  sciences, applied meteorology and physical oceanography 135(642), 1307–1320
  (2009)

Stier, P., Schutgens, N.A., Bellouin, N., Bian, H., Boucher, O., Chin, M., Ghan, S.,
  Huneeus, N., Kinne, S., Lin, G., et al.: Host model uncertainties in aerosol radia-
  tive forcing estimates: results from the aerocom prescribed intercomparison study.
  Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics 13(6), 3245–3270 (2013)

Twomey, S.: The influence of pollution on the shortwave albedo of clouds. Jour-
 nal of the atmospheric sciences 34(7), 1149–1152 (1977) https://doi.org/10.1175/
 1520-0469(1977)034⟨1149:TIOPOT⟩2.0.CO;2

Veličković, P., Cucurull, G., Casanova, A., Romero, A., Lio, P., Bengio, Y.: Graph
  attention networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1710.10903 (2017)

Wu, Z., Pan, S., Chen, F., Long, G., Zhang, C., Yu, P.S.: A comprehensive survey
 on graph neural networks. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning
 Systems 32(1), 4–24 (2020)

Zaveri, R.A., et al.: Development and evaluation of an explicit aqueous-phase chem-
  istry module in the aerosol dynamics, gas- and aerosol-phase chemistry, and
  transport model, partmc-mosaic. Journal of Geophysical Research: Atmospheres
  113(D7) (2008)

Zheng, Z., West, M., Zhao, L., Ma, P.-L., Liu, X., Riemer, N.: Quantifying the struc-
  tural uncertainty of the aerosol mixing state representation in a modal model.
  Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics 21(23), 17727–17741 (2021)




                                         18
