High-threshold fault-tolerant quantum computation with analog quantum error correction
Kosuke Fukui, Akihisa Tomita, and Atsushi Okamoto
Graduate School of Information Science and Technology,
Hokkaido University, Kita14-Nishi9, Kita-ku, Sapporo 060-0814, Japan

Keisuke Fujii

arXiv:1712.00294v3 [quant-ph] 6 Mar 2018

Department of Physics, Graduate School of Science, Kyoto University,
Kitashirakawa-Oiwakecho, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8502, Japan
To implement fault-tolerant quantum computation with continuous variables, the Gottesman–
Kitaev–Preskill (GKP) qubit has been recognized as an important technological element. However,
it is still challenging to experimentally generate the GKP qubit with the required squeezing level,
14.8 dB, of the existing fault-tolerant quantum computation. To reduce this requirement, we propose
a high-threshold fault-tolerant quantum computation with GKP qubits using topologically protected
measurement-based quantum computation with the surface code. By harnessing analog information
contained in the GKP qubits, we apply analog quantum error correction to the surface code. Furthermore, we develop a method to prevent the squeezing level from decreasing during the construction
of the large scale cluster states for the topologically protected measurement based quantum computation. We numerically show that the required squeezing level can be relaxed to less than 10 dB,
which is within the reach of the current experimental technology. Hence, this work can considerably
alleviate this experimental requirement and take a step closer to the realization of large scale quantum
computation.
I.

INTRODUCTION

plement fault-tolerant quantum computation (FTQC)
with CVs. Moreover, GKP qubits inherit the advantage of squeezed vacuum states on optical implementation; they can be entangled by only beam splitter coupling. Furthermore, qubit-level Clifford gates
on the GKP qubits in measurement-based quantum
computation (MBQC) are implemented by Gaussian
operation achieved simply by a homodyne measurement on CV cluster states [9]. Menicucci showed
that CV-FTQC is possible within the framework of
MBQC using squeezed vacuum cluster states with
GKP qubits [10]. A promising architecture for a scalable quantum circuit has been proposed recently [11,
12], where the GKP qubits are incorporated to perform
FTQC. Hence, the GKP qubits will play an indispensable role in implementing CV-FTQC.

Quantum computation has a great deal of potential to efficiently solve some hard problems for conventional computers [1, 2]. Although small-scale
quantum computation with various phycsical systems
has been demonstrated, large-scale quantum computation is still a significant experimental challenge for
most candidates of physical systems. Among the candidates, squeezed vacuum states in an optical system have shown great potential for large scale continuous variable (CV) quantum computation; in fact,
more than one million-mode CV cluster state has been
achieved already in an experiment [3]. This ability
of entanglement generation comes from the fact that
squeezed vacuum states can be entangled by using
the time-domain multiplexing approach by only beam
Regarding the generation of the GKP qubit, a
splitter coupling to miniaturize optical circuits [4, 5]. promising proposal [13] exists to prepare a good GKP
Since CV quantum computation itself has an ana- qubit in circuit quantum electrodynamics with the
log nature, it is difficult to handle the accumulation squeezing level around 10 dB [14] within the reach
of analog errors caused, for example, by photon loss of near-term experimental set-up. This implies that
during quantum computation [6, 7]. This can be cir- large scale quantum computation is possible, if the recumvented by encoding digitized variables into CVs quired squeezing level of the initial single qubit for
using an appropriate code, such as Gottesman–Kitaev– FTQC is less than 10 dB. Yet, there is a large gap bePreskill (GKP) code [8], which are referred to as tween the experimentally achievable squeezing level
GKP qubits. By digitizing CVs, the standard quan- and theoretical requirement squeezing level. For extum error correcting (QEC) code can be applied to im- ample, the existing CV-FTQC requires the squeezing

2
level of both squeezed vacuum state and GKP qubit
14.8–20.5 dB [10] to achieve the fault-tolerant threshold 2 × 10−2 [15–17] −10−6 [18–20]. Therefore, it is
highly desirable to reduce the required squeezing level
to around 10 dB to realize the large scale CV-FTQC.
In this work, we propose a high-threshold FTQC
to alleviate the required squeezing level for FTQC by
harnessing analog information contained in the GKP
qubit. The analog information obtained by measuring CV states (including GKP qubits) reflects the effect of noise as a deviation in the measurement outcome. Therefore, it contains beneficial information
to improve the error tolerance. The proposed highthreshold FTQC consists of two parts. One is to apply analog QEC [21] to the surface code, which allows us to implement the high-threshold FTQC. The
other is a construction of the cluster state for topologically protected MBQC [22–25] with a low error
accumulation by using the postselected measurement
with the help of analog information. In general, the
accumulation of errors on a qubit, which causes degradation of the threshold, increases as the number of
the entangling gate increases. In this work, we develop a novel method to avoid this accumulation of
errors by using the proposed postselected measurement which harnesses analog information. Accordingly, the required squeezing level for topologically
protected MBQC with the 3D cluster state constructed
by our method can be reduced to 9.8 dB. By contrast,
the required squeezing level in the existing CV-FTQC
scheme [10] combined with the fault-tolerant scheme
with the threshold 0.67 × 10−2 [25] is 16.0 dB [26].
This improvement results from the reduction from
16.0 dB to 9.8 dB corresponds to the reduction of the
error probability to misidentify the single GKP qubit
in q and p quadrature from 2.7 × 10−15 to 7.4 × 10−5 .
By achieving the requirement of the squeezing level
around 10 dB, we believe this work can considerably
take a step closer to the realization of large-scale quantum computation with digitized CV states and will be
indispensable to construct CV-FTQC.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In
Sec. II we briefly review the GKP qubit and the analog
QEC, and apply the analog QEC to a surface code. In
Sec. III we propose the postselected measurement and
present a high-threshold FTQC on the 3D cluster state
constructed by using the postselected measurement. In
Sec. IV the required squeezing level is calculated. We
first calculate the unheralded error in the leading order

for simplicity and then we simulate the analog QEC on
the 3D cluster states constructed by using the fusion
gate with the postselected measurement. Section V is
devoted to a discussion and conclusion.

II.

ANALOG QUANTUM ERROR CORRECTION
A. The GKP qubit

We review the GKP qubit and the error model considered in this work. Gottesman, Kitaev, and Preskill
proposed a method to encode a qubit in an oscillator’s
q (position) and p (momentum) quadratures to correct errors caused by a small deviation in the q and p
quadratures. This error correction of a small deviation
can handle any error acting on the oscillator, which can
be expanded as a superposition of displacements [8].
The basis of the GKP qubit is composed of √
a series
of Gaussian peaks of width σ and separation π embedded in a larger Gaussian envelope of width 1/σ .
Although in the case of infinite squeezing (σ → 0) the
GKP qubit bases become orthogonal, in the case of
finite squeezing, the approximate code states are not
orthogonal. The approximate code states |e
0i and |e
1i is
defined as
∞

|e
0i ∝ ∑

Z

t=−∞
∞ Z

|e
1i ∝ ∑

2 2

√

2

2

√

2

2

e−2πσ t e−(q−2t π ) /(2σ ) |qi dq, (1)
2

2

e−πσ (2t+1) /2

t=−∞

e−(q−(2t+1) π ) /(2σ ) |qi dq. (2)

In the case of finite squeezing there is a probability of
misidentifying |e
0i as |e
1i, and vice versa. Provided
the
√
magnitude of the true deviation is less than π /2 from
the peak value, the decision of the bit value from the
measurement of the GKP qubit is correct. The probability pcorr to identify the correct bit value is the area
of a normalized Gaussian of a variance σ 2 that lies be√
√
tween − π /2 and π /2 [10]:
pcorr =

Z

√

π
2
√
− π
2

dx √

1
2πσ 2

exp(−x2 /2σ 2 ).

(3)

In addition to the imperfection that originates from
the finite squeezing of the initial states, we consider
the Gaussian quantum channel [8, 27], which leads to
a displacement in the quadrature during the quantum

3
computation. The channel is described by superoperator ζ acting on density operator ρ as follows:

ρ → ζ (ρ ) =

1
πξ 2

Z

2

2

d 2 α e−|α | /ξ D(α )ρ D(α )† , (4)

where D(α ) is a displacement operator in the phase
space. The position q and momentum p are displaced
independently as follows:
q → q + v, p → p + u,

(5)

where v and u are real Gaussian random variables with
mean zero and variance ξ 2 . The Gaussian quantum
channel conserves the position of the Gaussian peaks
in the probability density function on the measurement
outcome of the GKP qubit, but increases the variance
as follows:

σ 2 → σ 2 + ξ 2,

(6)

FIG. 1. Introduction of a likelihood function. (a) Measurement outcome and deviation from the peak value in q
quadrature. The dotted line
√ shows the measurement outcome qm equal to (2t + k) π + ∆m (t = 0, ±1, ±2, · · · , k =
0, 1), where k is defined as the bit value that minimizes the
deviation ∆m . The red areas indicate the area that yields
code word (k + 1) mod 2, whereas the white area denotes
the area that yields the codeword k. (b) and (c) Gaussian
distribution functions as likelihood functions of the true deviation ∆ represented by the arrows. (b) refers to the case
of the correct decision,
where the amplitude of the true de√
viation is√|∆| < π /2, whereas
(c) the case of the incorrect
√
decision π /2 < |∆| < π .

where the σ 2 is the variance before the Gaussian
quantum channel. Therefore, in the next section, we
evaluate the performance under a code capacity noise
model, where the noise is parameterized by a single
variance σ 2 that includes the squeezing level of the
initial GKP qubit and the degradation via the Gaussian
The likelihood of the incorrect decision in Fig. 1 (c) is
quantum channel.
calculated by 1 − pcorr . In the analog QEC, we employ
Gaussian function, which the true deviation |∆| obeys,
as
likelihood function and calculate the likelihoods for
B. Analog quantum error correction
decision of the bit value. The likelihood of the correct
Before describing our proposal using the surface decision is calculated by
code, we explain how the analog QEC works in gen2
1
−∆ /(2σ 2 )
√
e
.
(8)
=
f
(∆
)
=
f
(∆)
m
eral to harness analog information contained in the
2πσ 2
GKP qubit to improve the performance of the QEC
(see also [21] for details). In the measurement of the The likelihood of the incorrect decision is calculated
GKP qubit for the computational basis, we make a de- by
√
cision on the bit value k(= 0, 1) from the measurement
f (∆) = f ( π − |∆m|).
(9)
outcome of the GKP qubit in the q quadrature qm =
qk + ∆m to minimize the deviation
|∆m |, where qk (k = Strictly speaking, the likelihood function should be the
√
0, 1) is defined as (2t + k) π (t = 0, ±1, ±2, · · · .) as periodic function including the sum of the Gaussian
shown in Fig. 1 (a). In the digital QEC [29, 30], we functions, considering the superposition of the Gausobtain the bit value from analog outcome and calculate sian states. In this paper, the likelihood function is
the likelihood from only binary information, since we approximated by simple Gaussian functions given by
consider the GKP qubit as a qubit. The likelihood of Eqs. (8) and (9), since the tail of the Gaussian function
the correct decision in Fig. 1 (b) using only bit value, next to the measurement outcome is small enough to
and the noise level σ 2 is calculated by
ignore [28]. In the QEC, we can reduce the decision
error on the entire code word by considering the like√
Z π
2
1
lihood of the joint event of multiple qubits and choos(7)
exp(−x2 /2σ 2 ).
pcorr = −√π dx √
2
ing the most likely candidate. The analog QEC under
2
πσ
2

4
the code capacity model can improve the QEC performance with a single block code without the concatenation such as the three-qubit flip code [21]. In the
previous proposal based on the digital QEC [29, 30]
can improve the QEC performance with only the concatenated code under the code capacity model, since
the improvement results from the message-passing algorithm. Under the several noise models, where the
property of the noise is known in advance to be correlated or biased, the digital QEC can also improve the
QEC performance with a single block code by considering the likelihood of the joint event of multiple
qubits. By contrast, a likelihood for the GKP qubit is
obtained by analog information from the measurement
without any knowledge about a priori noise distribution, since the analog information intrinsically obeys a
Gaussian distribution by virtue of the GKP encoding.
The performance of the QEC under the code capacity model can be evaluated with the hashing bound of
the standard deviation for the quantum capacity of the
Gaussian quantum channel. In Refs. [8, 27], the hashing bound has been conjectured to be ∼ 0.607. We
have shown using Monte Carlo method that the analog QEC with the concatenated code using the Knill’s
C4 /C6 code [15] can achieve the hashing bound of
the standard deviation ∼ 0.607 for the quantum capacity of the Gaussian quantum channel in Ref. [21].
This implies that the analog QEC with the C4 /C6 code
provides an optimal performance against the Gaussian
quantum channel. In addition, a specific method to
achieve the hashing bound against the Gaussian quantum channel has not been reported except for analog
QEC.

C.

Analog QEC with a surface code

While the analog QEC has been investigated by
the concatenated code, its validity on the surface code,
which is one of the important candidate for scalable
FTQC, is still unknown. Here we first investigate the
QEC process of a surface code under the code capacity noise model, where the QEC is operated with
ideal syndrome measurements. In the code capacity noise model, the surface code state consisting of
the GKP qubits of an infinite squeezing suffer from
the Gaussian quantum channel, which decrease the
squeezing level of the GKP qubits except for the syndrome qubits. Later we will extend the analog QEC to

FIG. 2. Simulation results for the logical error probabilities
of the surface code with ideal syndrome measurements using (a) the digital QEC and (b) the analog QEC for several
distance d which is size of the 3D cluster state. The simulation results for the digital QEC are obtained from 50000
samples. The simulation results for the analog QEC are
obtained from 50000 samples (for d = 5 − 15) and 10000
samples (for d = 17 − 25) .

the phenomenological noise model, where the single
GKP qubits of an infinite squeezing are encoded by
the surface code, and the Gaussian quantum channel
decreases the squeezing level of all qubits.
We here investigate the QEC process of a surface
code with the code capacity model to verify whether
analog QEC with the surface code can provide an optimal performance against the Gaussian quantum channel, since we employ topologically protected MBQC
to implement FTQC. For the QEC, we employ the
minimum distance decoding, which can be done efficiently by using a minimum-weight perfect matching algorithm [31, 32]. In the decoding, we employ
a minimum-weight perfect matching algorithm to find
the most likely location of the errors according to the
error syndrome. In the digital QEC, the weights are
determined from the error probability a priori. Specifically, for an independent and identical error distribution the weights are chosen to be homogeneous. On
the other hand, in the analog QEC, the weights are cal-

5

FIG. 3. Simulation results for the logical error probabilities of the surface code with noisy syndrome measurements
using (a) the digital QEC and (b) the analog QEC. The simulation results for the digital QEC are obtained from 50000
samples. The simulation results for the analog QEC are obtained from 10000 samples.

culated by using a likelihood as


√
lin = −log f (|∆m |)/ f ( π − |∆m |) ,

(10)

where and lin is a likelihood for the incorrect decision.
In Fig. 2, the logical error probabilities are plotted as
a function of the standard deviation of the GKP qubits
for the code distances d = 5, 7, 9, · · · .
To obtain the threshold value of the surface codes
with the digital QEC and the analog QEC, the finitesize scaling ansatz similar to Refs. [33, 34] was used.
Specifically, the logical error probability PL = A +
B(σ − σth )L1/v was used for the fitting function, where
A, B, the threshold value of the Gaussian quantum
channel noise σth , and v are the fitting parameters. The
results in Fig. 2 confirm that our method can reduce
the logical error probability. This indicates that the
analog QEC also achieves ∼0.607 close to the hashing bound of the quantum capacity of the Gaussian
quantum channel. On the other hand, the digital QEC
with only binary information achieves ∼0.542. This
implies that the analog QEC with the surface code
provides an optimal performance against the Gaussian
quantum channel. In Fig.2 (b), the curves do not meet
at a single point. We consider the reason is because of
the finite size effect in the case of the optimal decoding for the low-distance QEC. We confirmed the finite
size effect in Ref. [21] in the case of analog QEC. In
addition, the finite size effect is distinctively seen in
Fig. 1 of Ref. [29] in the case of the optimal decoding
for the low-distance QEC.
Next, we simulate the QEC process of topologically protected MBQC with the surface code [23, 24,

35, 36] under a phenomenological noise model. We
here investigate the QEC process on the 3D cluster
state. There are the primal and dual cubes, faces, and
edges in a unit cell of the 3D cluster state. In topological QEC on the 3D clsuter state, if there is no error,
the parity of each six X -basis measurement outcomes
on the primal cube is always even. The errors are described by using a dual 1-chain and we estimate the
location of errors from a set of odd parity cubes. In
Fig. 3, the logical error probabilities are plotted as a
function of the standard deviation. The results confirm
that our method can also suppress errors with the phenomenological noise model, and the threshold for the
standard deviation can be improved from 0.41 to 0.47,
which corresponds to improvement of the squeezing
level from 4.7 dB to 3.5 dB. Hence, analog QEC with
the phenomenological noise model can reduce the required squeezing level by 1.2 dB in comparison to the
digital QEC.
III. THE 3D CLUSTER STATE CONSTRUCTION
WITH THE POSTSELECTED MEASUREMENT
A. The accumulation of errors during the
construction of the 3D cluster state

We have investigated the QEC process of topologically protected MBQC on the 3D cluster state prepared by the infinitely squeezed GKP qubits in the previous section. In this section, we consider more realistic condition, where the 3D cluster state is constructed
from the single GKP qubits of a finite squeezing level
by using only the CZ gate. In the following, we refer this noise model to the correlated error model. In
the construction of the 3D cluster state by using only
the CZ gate, the accumulation of errors on the qubit,
which causes degradation of the squeezing level, generally increases as the number of the the CZ gate on
the qubit increases. The CZ gate for the GKP qubits,
which corresponds to the operator exp(-iq̂C q̂T ), transforms
q̂C → q̂C ,

(11)

q̂T → q̂T ,

(13)

p̂C → p̂C − q̂T ,

(12)

p̂T → p̂T − q̂C ,

(14)

where qˆC (qˆT ) and pˆC ( pˆT ) are the q and p quadrature
operators of the control (target) qubit, respectively.

6
We here consider the error propagation caused by
the CZ gate operation. The CZ gate operation displaces the deviation for the q and p quadrature as
∆q,C → ∆q,C ,

(15)

∆q,T → ∆q,T ,

(17)

∆p,C → ∆p,C − ∆q,T ,

(16)

∆p,T → ∆p,T − ∆q,C ,

(18)

where ∆q,C (∆q,T ) and ∆p,C (∆p,T ) are true deviation
values in the q and p quadrature of the control and target qubit, respectively. Since the true deviation obeys
Gaussian distribution and takes a value randomly and
independently, the variance of the control qubit and
target qubit in p quadrature changes as
2
2
2
σ p,C
→ σ p,C
+ σq,T
,

2
2
2
→ σ p,T
+ σq,C
,
σ p,T

(19)
(20)

2 (σ 2 ) and σ 2 (σ 2 ) are the variance of
where σq,C
q,T
p,C
p,T
the control and target qubit in the q and p quadrature,
respectively. On the other hand, the variance in the q
quadrature does not change. Therefore, the CZ gate increases the probability of misidentifying the bit value
in p quadrature. In this work, we define the error propagation caused by the CZ gate operation as the correlated error. Assuming that the variance of the single
GKP qubit is σ 2 , if the 3D cluster state is prepared
straightforwardly by only the CZ gates, the variance of
the qubits in the p quadrature become 5σ 2 , since the
qubit of the 3D cluster state is generated by using the
CZ gates between four neighboring qubits. This deteriorates the required squeezing level for the surface
code from 4.7 dB under the phenomenological noise
model to 13.7 dB under the correlated noise model. In
the following, we propose the postselected measurement to avoid the accumulation of the errors, which
allows us to achieve a high threshold.

B.

The postselected measurement

We propose the postselected measurement that utilizes analog information, and explain a method to generate an entanglement between the qubits by using the
postselected measurement, avoiding the accumulation
of errors during the construction process. Following
Ref. [37], we call this entanglement generation with
the postselected measurement as the fusion gate. As
we mentioned, in the measurement of the GKP qubit,

FIG. 4. Introduction of the postselected measurement. (a)
The conventional measurement of the GKP qubit, where the
Gaussian distribution followed by the deviation of the GKP
qubit that has variance σ 2 . The plain (blue) region and the
region with vertical (red) line represent the different code
word (k − 1) mod 2 and (k + 1) mod 2, respectively. The
vertical line regions correspond to the probability of incorrect decision of the bit value. (b) The postselected measurement. The shown dot line represents a upper limit vup . The
horizontal line areas show the probability that the results of
the measurement is discarded by introducing vup . The vertical line areas show the probability that our method fails.

we make a decision on the bit value k(= 0, 1) from the
measurement outcome of the GKP qubit qm = qk +∆m .
The conventional decision sets an upper limit for |∆m |
√
√
at π /2, and assigns the bit value k = (2t + k) π . The
decision is correct as long as the amplitude of the true
√
deviation |∆| falls between 0 and π /2. The probability to obtain the correct bit value is thus given by
pcorr in Eq. (7). The
√ proposed decision sets an upper limit at vup (< π /2) to give the maximum deviation that will not cause incorrect measurement of
the bit value as shown in Fig. 4. If the above condition |∆m | < vup is not satisfied, we discard the re¯
sult. Since
√ the measurement error occurs when |∆| exceeds | π /2 + vup |, the error probability decreases as
increasing vup at the cost of the success probability of
the measurement. The probability to obtain the correct bit value with the postselected measurement Ppost
cor /(Pcor + Pin ), where Pcor is the probis equal to Ppost
post
post
post
¯ falls in the correct
ability that the true deviation |∆|
in is the probability that the true deviation
area, and Ppost
cor and Pin for the
¯ falls in the incorrect area. Ppost
|∆|
post
GKP qubit of the variance σ 2 are given by
+∞

cor
Ppost
= ∑

√

Z 2k√π + π −vup

k=−∞ 2k

√

2
√
π
π − 2 +vup

dx √

1
2πσ 2

2

− x

e 2σ 2

(21)

7
the so called divide and conquer approach [38, 39] below.
C. The 3D cluster state construction

FIG. 5. The error probabilities of the postselected measurement Epost and the success probabilities of the postselected
measurement PSuc on the qubit of the variance 3σ 2 . (a) The
error probabilities with the method using the only CZ gate
and our method using the postselected√
measurement for the
upper limit
v
=
0
(red
solid),
v
=
up
up
√ π /10 (red dashed),
√
vup = π /6 (blue solid), and vup = π /4 (blue dashed),
respectively. (b) The success probability for our method.
The squeezing level is equal to −10log10 6σ 2 .

and
in
Ppost
=

+∞

∑

√

Z (2k+1)√π + π −vup
2

√
√
π
k=−∞ (2k+1) π − 2 +vup

dx √

1
2πσ 2

2
− x2
2σ

e

.

(22)
In Fig. 5, we plot the probability to misidentify the bit
value with the postselected measurement Epost = 1 −
Ppost and the success probability of the post-selection
cor + Pin as a function of the squeezing level
PSuc = Ppost
post
for several vup . As an example, we described the
measurement on the qubit of the variance 3σ 2 , which
is frequently occurred in the Bell measurement during the construction process. Fig. 5 shows that both
the error probability Epost and the success probability
PSuc decrease. In our method, we
√ apply the postselected measurement with vup = 2 π /5 to the 3D cluster states construction to prevent the deviation of the
GKP qubit from propagating the qubit-level error derived from the fusion gate. Because of the postselected
measurement, the operation such as the fusion gate becomes nondeterministic. This will be also handled by

We explain how to apply the postselected measurement to prevent the squeezing level from decreasing
during the construction of the 3D cluster state. Hereafter, we omit “GKP” of the GKP qubit and simply
call it as a qubit. In our method, there are four steps.
In step 1, we prepare a node qubit and two leaf qubits
of the variance σ 2 in the q and p quadrature (Fig. 6
(a)). By using the CZ gate we obtain 3-tree cluster
state composed of a node qubit and two leaf qubits,
where the the variance of the node and leaf qubits in
the p quadrature increase from σ 2 to 3σ 2 and 2σ 2 , respectively. On the other hand, the variance of the node
and leaf qubits in the q quadrature keep the variance
σ 2.
In step 2, we operate the single-qubit level QEC [8,
40, 41] by using the CNOT gate with the postselected
measurement (Fig. 6 (b)). In this single-qubit level
QEC, the additional single ancilla qubit is entangled
with the node qubit by using the CNOT gate, assuming
the node qubit is the target qubit. The ancilla qubit is
prepared in the state |e
0i to prevent us from identifying
the bit value of the node qubit. The CNOT gate, which
corresponds to the operator exp(-iq̂C p̂T ), transforms
q̂C → q̂C ,

(23)

q̂T → q̂T + q̂C ,

(25)

p̂C → p̂C − p̂T ,

(24)

p̂T → p̂T ,

(26)

Regarding the deviation, the CNOT gate operation displaces the deviation for the q and p quadrature as
∆q,C → ∆q,C ,

(27)

∆q,T → ∆q,T + ∆q,C ,

(29)

∆p,C → ∆p,C − ∆p,T ,

(28)

∆p,T → ∆p,T .

(30)

After the CNOT gate, we measure the ancilla qubit in
the p quadrature and obtain the deviation of the ancilla qubit ∆mp,a . In the single-qubit
√ level QEC, if
|∆mp,a | = |∆p,a − ∆p,n | is less than π /2, the true deviation value of the node qubit in the p quadrature
changes from ∆p,n to ∆p,a after the displacement operation, which displaces ∆p,n by ∆mp,a (= ∆p,a − ∆p,n ).

8

FIG. 6. The 3D cluster state construction. (a) The preparation of the 3-tree cluster state by using the CZ gate. (b) The
single-qubit level QEC using the additional ancilla qubit with the postselected measurement. (c)–(e) The construction of
the hexagonal cluster state from the 3-tree qubit with the postselected measurement. (f) The construction of the 3D cluster
state from the hexagonal cluster states, where the entanglement is generated between the neighboring hexagonal cluster
states without the postselected measurement.

√
On the other hand, if |∆p,a − ∆p,n | is more than π /2,
the bit error in the p quadrature occurs after the displacement operation. This error can be reduced by
the postselected measurement on the ancilla defined
as follows: if |∆mp,a | is less than vup , we then operate
the displacement to the node qubit in the p quadrature
by ∆mp,a . Otherwise, we discard the resultant 3-tree
cluster state and restart the procedure from step 1. The
error probability of the single-qubit level QEC ESQE
is given by Epost defined in the previous section with
the variance of 4σ 2 , since after the CNOT gate the
true deviation of the ancilla qubit in the p quadrature
|∆p,a − ∆p,n | obeys Gaussian distribution with the variance 4σ 2 , where 4σ 2 comes from the node qubit and
σ 2 from the ancilla qubit. To summarize, the singlequbit level QEC can reduce the variance of the node
qubit in the p quadrature from 3σ 2 to σ 2 , since ∆p,a
and ∆p,n obey Gaussian distributions with the variances 3σ 2 and σ 2 , respectively. The variance of the

node qubit in the q quadrature after the single-qubit
level QEC increases from σ 2 to 2σ 2 , since the true
deviation ∆p,n + ∆q,a obeys Gaussian distribution with
the variance 2σ 2 , where the ∆p,n and ∆q,a are the true
deviation of the node qubit and the ancilla qubit, respectively. This increase in the variance in q quadrature has no effect on the threshold value, whereas the
unheralded error in the p quadrature affects it.
In step 3, we increase the number of the leaf qubits
of the tree cluster state by using the fusion gate with
the postselected measurement. The fusion gate can
avoid the deviation of the qubit from increasing and
the postselected measurement can prevent the qubitlevel error from propagating during constructing the
6-tree cluster state, which we call the hexagonal cluster state. We describe the construction of the 4-tree
cluster state in detail as follows. By using the fusion
gate, we construct the 4-tree cluster state from the two
3-tree cluster states, one of which is corrected by the

9
single-qubit level QEC and the other is uncorrected
(Fig. 6 (c)). In the fusion gate, the Bell measurement
with the postselected measurement is implemented by
beam splitter coupling and homodyne measurement.
Then feedforward is operated according to the homodyne measurement outcomes on the leaf and the node
qubits, respectively. If the misidentification of the bit
value of the leaf or node qubits occurs, the feedforward operation propagates the qubit-level error in the
4-tree cluster. The probabilities to misidentify the bit
value of the leaf and node qubits are the probabilities
to misidentify the bit value of the qubit of the variances
3σ 2 and 4σ 2 , respectively. This unheralded qubitlevel error can be reduced by using the postselected
measurement. We define the unheralded errors on the
leaf qubits and node qubits with the postselected measurement as Epost (3σ 2 ) and Epost (4σ 2 ), respectively.
The error probabilities Epost (3σ 2 ) and Epost (4σ 2 ) are
given by Epost defined in the previous section with the
variance of 3σ 2 and 4σ 2 , respectively.
To evaluate the variances of the leaf and node, we
describe the process of the beam splitter coupling in
the following. The 50:50 beam splitter coupling between the leaf qubit of the 3-tree cluster state after the
single-qubit level QEC and the node qubit of the 3-tree
cluster state without the single-qubit level QEC transforms the variables of the leaf and node qubits in the q
and p quadrature as
√
(31)
q̂leaf → (q̂leaf + p̂node )/ 2,
√
p̂leaf → ( p̂leaf + q̂node )/ 2,
(32)
√
q̂node → (q̂leaf − p̂node )/ 2,
(33)
√
p̂node → ( p̂leaf − q̂node )/ 2,
(34)

bit value of the leaf and node qubits in the p quadrature are the probabilities to misidentify the bit value of
the qubit of the variances 3σ 2 and 4σ 2 , respectively.
We can reduce the misidentifying error probabilities occurred in the construction of the hexagonal cluster state in the same way. We generate the 5-tree cluster state from the 3-tree cluster states and the 4-tree
cluster state by using fusion gate with the postselected
measurement on the leaf qubit of the 3-tree cluster
state and the node qubit of the 4-tree cluster state with
the postselected measurement (Fig. 6 (d)). Finally, we
construct the hexagonal cluster state from the six 5tree cluster states with the postselected measurement
on the Bell measurement between leaf qubits (Fig. 6
(e)).
In step 4, we generate the 3D cluster state deterministically. Hence, the postselected measurement
can not be used and the 3D cluster state is generated
from the hexagonal cluster states by using the fusion
gate with the postselected measurement between the
leaf qubits of the neighboring hexagonal cluster states
without the postselected measurement (Fig. 6 (f)). In
this step, the unheralded error, which corresponds to
the probability to misidentify the bit value of the qubit
of the variance 3σ 2 , accumulates on the node qubits.
We define this error probability as EBell . We can eventually obtain the 3D cluster state composed of the node
qubits whose variance and squeezing level in the p
quadrature are σ 2 and −10log10 2σ 2 , respectively.
By contrast, the conventional method, where the
fusion gate with the postselected measurement is not
used and the 3D cluster state is generated by using only the CZ gate between neighboring nodes,
yields the variance 5σ 2 and the squeezing level
−10log10 10σ 2 of node qubits in the p quadrature, respectively. Therefore, the single-qubit level QEC and
the fusion gate with postselected measurement can
avoid the degradation of the squeezing level during the
construction of the 3D cluster state. This relaxes the
requirement on the squeezing level of the initial single qubit considerably as will be calculated in the next
section.

where q̂leaf (q̂node ) and p̂leaf ( p̂node ) the variables of the
leaf (node) qubit in the q and p quadrature, respectively. After the coupling, the variances of the leaf
qubit in the q and p quadrature changes as σ 2 → 2σ 2
and 2σ 2 → 3σ 2 /2, respectively. The variances of
the node qubit in the q and p quadrature changes as
σ 2 → 3σ 2 /2 and 3σ 2 → 2σ 2 , respectively. After the
homodyne measurement on the leaf and node qubit
in the p quadrature, the measurement outcome of the
leaf and node qubit in the p quadrature are rescaled
√
by multiplying the measurement
IV. THRESHOLD CALCULATION FOR
√ outcome by 2 in a
TOPOLOGICALLY PROTECTED MBQC
post-process as√
(pleaf + qnode )/ 2 → pleaf + qnode and
(pleaf − qnode )/ 2 → pleaf − qnode , respectively. The
variances of the leaf and node qubits in the p quadraIn this section, we calculate the threshold value for
2
2
2
2
ture changes as 3σ /2 → 3σ and 2σ → 4σ , respec- the 3D cluster state prepared by using the postselected
tively. Therefore, the probabilities to misidentify the measurement. In this calculation, it is assumed that the

10
3D cluster state is prepared using the proposed method be obtained as
with the qubit of the variances finite value σ 2 in q and
Etot = Enode (σ 2 ) + ESQE + 6×Epost (3σ 2 )
p quadrature, that is, the initial variances of the qubit
+ 2 × Epost (4σ 2 ) + 2 × EBell .
(35)
before the CZ gate in Fig. 6 (a) are σ 2 in q and p
quadrature.
We estimated the required squeezing level for CVFTQC in the leading order as follows. Let us first conWe define the unheralded error probability Etot per sider the case without analog QEC. By virtue of the
one node qubit of the 3D cluster state in the p quadra- postselected measurements, the correlated error probature. The Etot results from four causes, which corre- bility on the 3D cluster state is now very small and can
spond to the error originated from the node qubit itself, be neglected safely. In fact, for around 10 dB squeezthe unheralded errors during postselected measure- ing with v = 2√π /5, the unheralded error probaup
ments in steps 2 and 3, and the error during the deter- bility E (3σ 2 ) and E (4σ 2 ) is order of 10−5 and
post
post
ministic fusion gate in step 4. The unheralded error of 10−4 , which is much smaller than the unheralded erthe node qubit itself Enode occurs, when the magnitude ror probability E
Bell of about 1.5 % [43]. Hence, since
of the√true deviation value of the node qubit is more we can ignore the correlated errors on the 3D clusthan π /2. The error probability Enode is given by ter state, the error probability E can be fairly well
tot
Epost with the variance in p quadrature σ 2 . The unher- characterized by the single parameter σ 2 under the
alded error probability in the single-qubit level QEC phenomenological noise model, where the required
(step 2) ESQE is given by Epost with the variance in p squeezing level for topologically protected MBQC is
quadrature 4σ 2 . The unheralded errors during posts- 2.9-3.3% [34, 42]. We define the required squeezelected measurements occurs in the two processes of ing level as the squeezing level that provides E =
tot
step 3. One is in the 4- and 5-tree cluster states con- 3.0%, and the numerical calculation in the leading orstruction by using the Bell measurement shown in Fig. der without analog QEC yields the required squeezing
6 (c) and (d). The probabilities of misidentifying the level of 10.5 dB with v = 2√π /5. We can further
up
bit value on the node qubit in the Bell measurement are improve the tolerable standard deviation by using anaboth Epost (4σ 2 ) given by Epost with the variance in p log QEC. In Sec. II we numerically simulated the imquadrature 4σ 2 . The other unheralded error process of provement of the topologically protected MBQC perthe postselected measurement in step 3 is the bit value formance in the analog QEC with the phenomenologimisidentification on the leaf qubits by using the fusion cal noise model, and obtained the improvement on the
gate in Fig. 6 (c)-(e). The error probability Epost (3σ 2 ) required squeezing level by 1.2 dB in comparison to
is given by Epost with the variance in p quadrature 3σ 2 . the digital QEC as shown in Fig. 3. Hence, we can obThe measurement error in the deterministic entangle- tain the required squeezing level 9.3 dB in the leading
ment generation between neighboring node qubits oc- order with analog QEC.
curs in the Bell measurement between the leaf qubits
To proceed to the detailed calculation of Etot , we
of the hexagonal cluster states without the postselected simulate the QEC for topologically protected MBQC
measurement (Fig. 6 (f)). This unheralded error prob- by using the minimum-weight perfect matching algoability EBell corresponds to the probability of misiden- rithm. In Fig. 7, the logical error probabilities are
tifying the bit value on the qubit of the variance 3σ 2 plotted as a function of the standard deviation. The
without the postselected measurement. This process results confirm that our method can also suppress errequires two Bell measurements per one node qubit as rors with the independent error model, and the threshshown in Fig. 6 (f)
old for the standard deviation can be improved from
0.208 to 0.228, which corresponds to squeezing level
For simplicity, we firstly calculate the Etot in the from 10.6 dB to 9.8 dB. In the numerical calculation,
√
leading order. Later we will take more detailed calcu- we set the upper limit vup to 2 π /5 in order to adopt
lation by the simulation of the QEC for topologically the independent error model. Therefore, CV-FTQC
protected MBQC by using the minimum-weight per- with analog QEC and the postselected measurement
fect matching algorithm.
can improve the required squeezing level for topologically protected MBQC by 6.2 dB in comparison to the
The error probability Etot in the leading order can existing scheme for CV-FTQC [10, 26].

11
2
state can be counted as RHexa = (1/PBell−II
+ 1) ×
3
(2/PBell−II ), where PBell−II is equal to PSuc 2 (3σ 2 ).
Therefore, the resources √
per the hexagonal cluster
states RHexa with vup = 2 π /5 can be estimated as
9.2 × 106 to achieve the required squeezing level 9.8
dB, since PSuc (3σ 2 ) and PSuc (4σ 2 ) with the squeezing
level 9.8 dB are 34.6 % and 30.2 %, respectively.

V. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION

FIG. 7. Simulation results for the logical error probabilities
of the surface code by using the 3D√cluster state prepared
by the proposed method for vup = 2 π /5 with noisy syndrome measurements using (a) the digital QEC and (b) the
analog QEC, respectively. The simulation results for the
digital QEC are obtained from 50000 samples. The simulation results for the analog QEC are obtained from 10000
samples.

Finally, we examined the resource required per
node qubit composing the 3D cluster states, namely
the average number of the 3-tree cluster states to construct the hexagonal cluster state. The average number of the 3-tree cluster states to construct the 5-tree
cluster state can be counted as R5tree = (1/PSQEC +
2 , where P
2)/PBell
SQEC and PBell are the success probability of the single-qubit level QEC and of the Bell
measurement with postselected measurement, respectively. PSQEC and PBell are calculated as PSuc (4σ 2 ) and
PSuc (3σ 2 ) × PSuc (4σ 2 ), respectively, where PSuc(3σ 2 )
(PSuc (4σ 2 )) is the success probability of the postselected measurement on the qubit of the variance is
3σ 2 (4σ 2 ). Similarly, the average number of the 3tree cluster states to construct the hexagonal cluster

In this work, we have proposed a high-threshold
FTQC to alleviate the required squeezing level for CVFTQC by harnessing analog information contained in
the GKP qubits. The proposed method consists of
applying analog QEC to the surface code and constructing the cluster state for the topologically protected MBQC with a low error accumulation by using
the postselected measurement. We have numerically
shown that the required squeezing level can be improved to less than 10 dB with analog QEC on the 3D
cluster states prepared by using the fusion gate with
the postselected measurement. Furthermore, we have
numerically investigated validity of analog QEC for
the surface code against the Gaussian quantum channel with ideal syndrome measurements. The numerical results have shown the analog QEC also achieves
∼0.607 close to the hashing bound of the quantum capacity of the Gaussian quantum channel. To the best of
our knowledge, no method to provide the optimal performance has been reported except for analog QEC.
The use of analog information has been developed
in classical error correction against the disturbance
such as an additive white Gaussian noise [44] and
identified as an important tool for qubit readout [45–
47]. However, use of analog information has been left
unexploited to improve the QEC performance, where
superposition of the encoded qubits need to be maintained. In this work, we have shown that analog QEC
can improve the QEC performance to implement a
high-threshold FTQC.
To generate the GKP qubit, several methods have
been proposed [13, 48–54]. In particular, a promising proposal [13] recently exists to prepare a good
GKP qubit in circuit quantum electrodynamics with
the squeezing level around 10 dB [14]. This suggests
that the GKP qubit with the squeezing level around 10
dB will be able to generate within the reach of nearterm experimental set-up. Our method can achieve this

12
experimental requirement for the squeezing level, taking a step closer to the realization of large-scale quantum computation. Hence, this is the novel application
of the analog information for the practical large scale
MBQC.
We would like to mention the physical implementation for CV-FTQC with our scheme. In our method,
although the fusion gate is nondeterministic, there are
a number of studies for the architecture that deal with
topologically protected MBQC with nondeterministic
fusion gate [55–59]. Our method can be implemented
by these architecture straightforwardly. Considering
these architecture, it is assumed that the hexagonal
cluster state is prepared from the 3-tree cluster state
by a purely linear optical network, composed of beam
splitter coupling, an optical switch, and so on, while it
is assumed that we can use the on-demand sources of
the 3-tree cluster state.
Furthermore, analog QEC and the postselected

measurement can be not limited to the GKP qubit
but widely applicable MBQC using various QEC
codes [60–62], and is a versatile tool for improvement of the QEC performance and the decision error of
the bit value, which can incorporate with GKP qubit,
cat code, and other various codes used to digitize CV
states. Hence, we believe this work will open up a new
approach to QEC with digitized CV states, which will
be indispensable to construct CV-FTQC.

[1] P. W. Shor, Polynomial-Time Algorithms for Prime
Factorization and Discrete Logarithms on a Quantum
Computer, SIAM J. Comp. 26, 1484 (1997).
[2] L. K. Grover, Quantum Mechanics Helps in Searching
for a Needle in a Haystack, Phys. Rev. Lett. 79, 325
(1997).
[3] J. Yoshikawa, S. Yokoyama, T. Kaji, C. Sornphiphatphong, Y. Shiozawa, K. Makino, and A. Furusawa,
Generation of one-million-mode continuous-variable
cluster state by unlimited time-domain multiplexing,
APLPhotonics 1 060801 (2016).
[4] N. C. Menicucci, X. Ma, and T. C. Ralph, Arbitrarily Large Continuous-Variable Cluster States from a
Single Quantum Nondemolition Gate, Phys. Rev. Lett.
104, 250503 (2010).
[5] N. C. Menicucci, Temporal-mode continuousvariable cluster states using linear optics, Phys. Rev.
A 83, 062314 (2011).
[6] M. Ohliger, K. Kieling, and J. Eisert, Limitations
of quantum computing with Gaussian cluster states,
Phys. Rev. A 82, 042336 (2010).
[7] M. Ohliger and J. Eisert, Efficient measurementbased quantum computing with continuous-variable
systems, Phys. Rev. A 85, 062318 (2012).
[8] D. Gottesman, A. Kitaev, and J. Preskill, Encoding
a qubit in an oscillator, Phys. Rev. A 64, 012310
(2001).
[9] N. C. Menicucci, P. van Loock, M. Gu, C. Weedbrook,
T. C. Ralph, and M. A. Nielsen, Universal Quantum Computation with Continuous-Variable Cluster

States, Phys. Rev. Lett. 97, 110501 (2006).
[10] N. C. Menicucci, Fault-Tolerant Measurement-Based
Quantum Computing with Continuous-Variable Cluster States, Phys. Rev. Lett. 112, 120504 (2014).
[11] S. Takeda and A. Furusawa, Universal Quantum
Computing with Measurement-Induced ContinuousVariable Gate Sequence in a Loop-Based Architecture, Phys. Rev. Lett. 119, 120504 (2017).
[12] R. N. Alexander, S. Yokoyama, A. Furusawa, and
N. C. Menicucci, Universal quantum computation
with temporal-mode bilayer square lattices, arXiv:
1711.08782 (2017).
[13] B. M. Terhal and D. J. Weigand, Encoding a qubit into
a cavity mode in circuit QED using phase estimation,
Phys. Rev. A 93, 012315 (2016).
[14] M. A. Castellanos-Beltran, K. D. Irwin, G. C. Hilton,
L. R. Vale, and K. W. Lehnert, Amplification and
squeezing of quantum noise with a tunable Josephson
metamaterial, Nat. Physics 4, 929-931 (2008).
[15] E. Knill, Quantum computing with realistically noisy
devices, Nature 434, 39-44 (2005).
[16] K. Fujii and K. Yamamoto, Topological one-way
quantum computation on verified logical cluster
states, Phys. Rev. A 82, 060301(R) (2010).
[17] K. Fujii and K. Yamamoto, Cluster-based architecture for fault-tolerant quantum computation, Phys.
Rev. A 81, 042324 (2010).
[18] E. Knill, R. Laflamme, and W. H. Zurek, Resilient
quantum computation: error models and thresholds,
Proc. R. Soc. A 454, 365 (1998).

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

This work was funded by ImPACT Program of
Council for Science, Technology and Innovation (Cabinet Office, Government of Japan). K. Fujii is supported by KAKENHI No. 16H02211, JST PRESTO
JPMJPR1668, JST ERATO JPM- JER1601, and JST
CREST JPMJCR1673.

13
[19] J. Preskill, Reliable quantum computers, Proc. R. Soc.
A 454, 385 (1998).
[20] A. Y. Kitaev, Quantum computations: algorithms and
error correction , Russ. Math. Surv. 52, 1191 (1997).
[21] K. Fukui, A. Tomita, and A. Okamoto, Analog Quantum Error Correction with Encoding a Qubit into an
Oscillator, Phys. Rev. Lett. 119, 180507 (2017).
[22] A. Y. Kitaev, Fault-tolerant quantum computation by
anyons, Ann. Phys. 303, 2 (2003).
[23] R. Raussendorf and J. Harrington, Fault-Tolerant
Quantum Computation with High Threshold in Two
Dimensions, Phys. Rev. Lett. 98, 190504 (2007).
[24] R. Raussendorf, J. Harrington, and K. Goyal, Topological fault-tolerance in cluster state quantum computation, New J. Phys. 9, 199 (2007).
[25] R. Raussendorf, J. Harrington, and K. Goyal, A
fault-tolerant one-way quantum computer, Annals of
Physics 321, 2242 (2006).
[26] In Ref. [10], the CZ gate is performed by the measurement on squeezed vacuum states on a 2D cluster state with ancilla GKP qubits used to implement
the single-qubit level QEC. Then, the fault-tolerant
threshold of the squeezing level is obtained from the
error probability of the the single-qubit level QEC after the CZ gate combining with the conventional faulttolerant schemes. While in Ref. [10] the threshold
value 10−6 [18–20] to calculate the required squeezing level 20.5 dB is employed, here we use the threshold value 0.67% obtained in Ref. [25] to calculate the
required squeezing level 16.0 dB to directly compare
the existing scheme with the proposed scheme, where
the analog QEC is applied. We should note that it is
unfair to directly compare the present result with the
required squeezing level 20.5 dB in Ref. [10], since
optimization of the squeezing level would not be not
the main scope of Ref. [10].
[27] J. Harrington and J. Preskill, Achievable rates for the
Gaussian quantum channel, Phys. Rev. A 64, 062301
(2001).
[28] For example, in the case of the squeezing level 1-2
dB
that lies between 0 and
√ and 10 dB, 2the probability
π /2 are ∼ 10 and ∼ 1012 times
√as large as the probability that lies between 0 and 3 π /2, respectively.
[29] D. Poulin, Optimal and efficient decoding of concatenated quantum block codes, Phys. Rev. A 74, 052333
(2006).
[30] H. Goto and H. Uchikawa, Fault-tolerant quantum
computation with a soft-decision decoder for error
correction and detection by teleportation, Sci. Rep.
3, 2044 (2013).
[31] J. Edmonds, Paths, trees, and flowers, Canadian Journal of mathematics 17, 449 (1965).
[32] V. Kolmogorov, Blossom v: a new implementation of
a minimum cost perfect matching algorithm, Mathematical Programming Computation1, 43 (2009).

[33] K. Fujii and Y. Tokunaga, Error and loss tolerances
of surface codes with general lattice structures, Phys.
Rev. A 86, 020303(R) (2012).
[34] C. Wang, J. Harrington, and J. Preskill, ConfinementHiggs transition in a disordered gauge theory and the
accuracy threshold for quantum memory, Ann. Phys.
303, 31 (2003).
[35] K. Fujii and M. Hayashi, Verifiable fault tolerance
in measurement-based quantum computation, Phys.
Rev. A 96, 030301(R) (2017).
[36] K. Fujii, Quantum Computation with Topological
Codes: From Qubit to Topological Fault-Tolerance,
Springer Briefs in Mathematical Physics Vol. 8
(Springer, Berlin, 2015).
[37] D. E. Browne and T. Rudolph, Resource-Efficient Linear Optical Quantum Computation, Phys. Rev. Lett.
95, 010501 (2005).
[38] M. A. Nielsen, Optical Quantum Computation Using
Cluster States, Phys. Rev. Lett. 93, 040503 (2004).
[39] C. M. Dawson, H. L. Haselgrove, and M. A. Nielsen,
Noise Thresholds for Optical Quantum Computers,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 96, 020501 (2006).
[40] S. Glancy and E. Knill, Error analysis for encoding
a qubit in an oscillator, Phys. Rev. A 73, 012325
(2006).
[41] A. M. Steane, Active Stabilization, Quantum Computation, and Quantum State Synthesis, Phys. Lett. 78,
2252 (1997).
[42] T. Ohno, G. Arakawa, I. Ichinose, and T. Matsui, Phase structure of the random-plaquette gauge
model: accuracy threshold for a toric quantum memory, Nucl. Phys. B 697, 462 (2004).
[43] In the single-qubit level QEC, we use the ancilla qubit
whose finite squeezing level is equal to that of the
node qubit. Even if we do not employed the singlequbit level QEC, the proposed scheme with analog
QEC does work well. In such a case, the measurement
error probability of the node qubit Enode (σ 2 ) in Eq.
(35) increases to Enode (3σ 2 ), which is avoided when
the single-qubit level QEC is employed. As a result,
the threshold of the squeezing level is degraded from
∼ 9.8 dB to ∼ 10.3 dB.
[44] T. Kailath, An innovations approach to least-squares
estimation–Part I: Linear filtering in additive white
noise, IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control 13,
646 (1968).
[45] B. D’Anjou and W. A. Coish, Soft Decoding of
a Qubit Readout Apparatus, Phys. Rev. Lett. 113,
230402 (2014).
[46] B. D’Anjou, L. Kuret, L. Childress, and W. A. Coish,
Maximal Adaptive-Decision Speedups in QuantumState Readout, Phys. Rev. X 6, 011017 (2016).
[47] In such use of analog information for quantum measurement [45], qubit strings need to be measured by
a readout apparatus to estimate a channel noise to ob-

14
tain a likelihood using statistical approach. By contrast, a likelihood is obtained using only the measurement outcome of a single qubit in analog QEC.
[48] H. M. Vasconcelos, L. Sanz, and S. Glancy, Alloptical generation of states for ”Encoding a qubit in
an oscillator”, Opt. Lett. 35, 3261 (2010).
[49] K. R. Motes, B. Q. Baragiola, A. Gilchrist, N.
C. Menicucci, Encoding qubits into oscillators with
atomic ensembles and squeezed light, Phys. Rev. A
95, 053819 (2017).
[50] D. J. Weigand and B. M. Terhal, Generating Grid
States From Schrdinger Cat States without PostSelection, arXiv: 1709.08580 (2017).
[51] P. Brooks, A. Kitaev, and J. Preskill, Protected gates
for superconducting qubits, Phys. Rev. A 87, 052306
(2013).
[52] S. Pirandola, S. Mancini, D. Vitali, and P. Tombesi,
Continuous variable encoding by ponderomotive interaction, Eur. Phys. J. D 37, 283-290 (2006).
[53] B.C. Travaglione and G. J. Milburn, Preparing encoded states in an oscillator, Phys. Rev. A 66, 052322
(2002).
[54] S. D. Bartlett, H. deGuise, and B. C. Sanders, Quantum encodings in spin systems and harmonic oscillators, Phys. Rev. A 65, 052316 (2002).
[55] M.Gimeno-Segovia, P. Shadbolt, D. E. Browne, and
T. Rudolph, From Three-Photon Greenberger-HorneZeilinger States to Ballistic Universal Quantum Com-

putation, Phys. Rev. Lett. 115, 020502 (2015).
[56] Y. Li, P. C. Humphreys, G. J. Mendoza, and S. C.
Benjamin, Resource Costs for Fault-Tolerant Linear
Optical Quantum Computing, Phys. Rev. X 5, 041007
(2015).
[57] C. Monroe, R. Raussendorf, A. Ruthven, K. R.
Brown, P. Maunz, L.-M. Duan, and J. Kim,Largescale modular quantum-computer architecture with
atomic memory and photonic interconnects, Phys.
Rev. A 89, 022317 (2014).
[58] M. Gimeno-Segovia., H. Cable, G. J. Mendoza, P.
Shadbolt, J. W. Silverstone, J. Carolan, M. G. Thompson, J. L. O’Brien, and T. Rudolph, Relative multiplexing for minimising switching in linear-optical
quantum computing, New J. Phys. 19, 063013 (2017).
[59] K. Fujii and Y. Tokunaga, Fault-Tolerant Topological One-Way Quantum Computation with Probabilistic Two-Qubit Gates, Phys. Rev. Lett. 105, 250503
(2010).
[60] H. Bombin and M. A. Martin-Delgado, Topological
Quantum Distillation, Phys. Rev. Lett. 97, 180501
(2006).
[61] A. M. Steane, Error Correcting Codes in Quantum
Theory, Phys. Rev. Lett. 77, 793 (1996).
[62] D. Bacon, Operator quantum error-correcting subsystems for self-correcting quantum memories, Phys.
Rev. A 73, 012340 (2006).

