                                          Enhanced accuracy through ensembling of randomly
                                          initialized auto-regressive models for time-dependent
                                                                   PDEs
                                              Ishan Khurjekara , Indrashish Sahaa , Lori Graham-Bradya , Somdatta
                                                                           Goswamia∗




arXiv:2507.03863v1 [cs.LG] 5 Jul 2025
                                          a
                                              Department of Civil and Systems Engineering, Johns Hopkins University, 3400 N.
                                                               Charles Street, Baltimore, 21218, MD, USA




                                        Graphical Abstract
                                        Enhanced accuracy through ensembling of randomly initialized auto-
                                        regressive models for time-dependent PDEs
                                        Ishan Khurjekara , Indrashish Sahaa , Lori Graham-Bradya , Somdatta Goswamia




                                          ∗
                                            Corresponding author
                                            Email addresses: ishan.khurjekar@jhu.edu (Ishan Khurjekara ), isaha3@jhu.edu
                                        (Indrashish Sahaa ), lori@jhu.edu (Lori Graham-Bradya ), somdatta@jhu.edu
                                        (Somdatta Goswamia )
Highlights
Enhanced accuracy through ensembling of randomly initialized auto-
regressive models for time-dependent PDEs
Ishan Khurjekara , Indrashish Sahaa , Lori Graham-Bradya , Somdatta Goswamia

   • An ensemble of machine learning surrogate models is initialized with
     random weights and trained in parallel for spatiotemporal field evolu-
     tion tasks.

   • The ensemble approach leads to reduced error accumulation for the
     field evolution task in different PDE-driven dynamic systems.
  Enhanced accuracy through ensembling of randomly
  initialized auto-regressive models for time-dependent
                           PDEs
       Ishan Khurjekara , Indrashish Sahaa , Lori Graham-Bradya , Somdatta
                                    Goswamia∗
  b
      Department of Civil and Systems Engineering, Johns Hopkins University, 3400 N.
                       Charles Street, Baltimore, 21218, MD, USA




Abstract
Systems governed by partial differential equations (PDEs) require computa-
tionally intensive numerical solvers to predict spatiotemporal field evolution.
While machine learning (ML) surrogates offer faster solutions, autoregres-
sive inference with ML models suffer from error accumulation over succes-
sive predictions, limiting their long-term accuracy. We propose a deep en-
semble framework to address this challenge, where multiple ML surrogate
models with random weight initializations are trained in parallel and ag-
gregated during inference. This approach leverages the diversity of model
predictions to mitigate error propagation while retaining the autoregressive
strategies ability to capture the system’s time dependent relations. We val-
idate the framework on three PDE-driven dynamical systems - stress evo-
lution in heterogeneous microstructures, Gray-Scott reaction-diffusion, and
planetary-scale shallow water system - demonstrating consistent reduction in
error accumulation over time compared to individual models. Critically, the
method requires only a few time steps as input, enabling full trajectory pre-
dictions with inference times significantly faster than numerical solvers. Our
results highlight the robustness of ensemble methods in diverse physical sys-
tems and their potential as efficient and accurate alternatives to traditional
solvers. The codes for this work are available on GitHub (Link).

   ∗
    Corresponding author
    Email addresses: ishan.khurjekar@jhu.edu (Ishan Khurjekara ), isaha3@jhu.edu
(Indrashish Sahaa ), lori@jhu.edu (Lori Graham-Bradya ), somdatta@jhu.edu
(Somdatta Goswamia )


Preprint submitted to Elsevier                                             July 8, 2025
Keywords: time-dependent PDEs, surrogate model, autoregressive
prediction, model ensemble, error accumulation reduction, mixture of
experts


1. Introduction
    Accurate simulation of complex physical systems often relies on solving
time-dependent partial differential equations (PDEs) using traditional nu-
merical methods (finite difference, finite element, etc.), but these approaches
can be prohibitively expensive when high resolution or many repeated queries
are required. In many engineering and scientific applications (e.g. design op-
timization, uncertainty quantification), it is therefore desirable to build fast
data-driven surrogate models that approximate the PDE solution operator.
Deep neural networks have emerged as a powerful class of surrogates, capable
of learning high-dimensional mappings from current system states to future
states with far less online computation than conventional solvers. These
ML-based simulators can leverage large training datasets to encode complex
dynamics and thus provide flexible, real-time prediction of spatiotemporal
evolution.
    For time-dependent problems, a common strategy is to train an autore-
gressive neural model that predicts the next time step (or increment) given
the current state, and then to apply it recursively to generate a full time tra-
jectory. This one-step training approach is often more accurate and grounded
in the physics of the system than trying to predict far-future states directly.
However, a well-known challenge is that small one-step errors accumulate
over repeated predictions. In other words, the iterative use of a learned time
update operator tends to compound its own prediction errors, degrading sta-
bility and accuracy when the model is rolled out for long horizons.
    To address this challenge, several architectural innovations have been
proposed. Recurrent networks (LSTM, GRU), attention-based transformers,
and memory-augmented models have been introduced to improve tempo-
ral coherence. In the context of PDEs, neural operator (NO) frameworks
such as DeepONet [1] and Fourier Neural Operator [2] offer a means to pre-
serve spatial structures while modeling temporal evolution. Yet, NOs too
have shown vulnerability to error accumulation in autoregressive settings [3].
Consequently, recent work has sought to enhance these models via architec-
tural modifications [4, 5], hybrid schemes with numerical integrators [6], and


                                       2
RNN-based sequence learners on top of NO outputs [7, 8]. While effective,
these solutions often introduce architectural complexity and increase tuning
burden.
    In this work, we propose a conceptually simple yet effective alterna-
tive: mitigating long-term prediction error through deep ensembling. Rather
than modifying the architecture, we train multiple instances of the same au-
toregressive model, each with a different random initialization. Due to the
stochastic nature of training (e.g., with stochastic gradient descent), these
models converge to different local minima and yield diverse prediction be-
haviors [9, 10]. By averaging the predictions from this ensemble at each
time step, we reduce individual model biases and suppress cumulative er-
ror. This approach is grounded in classical ensemble learning theory, which
shows that aggregating diverse learners improves robustness and generaliza-
tion [11]. While ensemble methods such as bagging, boosting, and Mixture of
Experts (MoE) often rely on explicit diversity through data splits or gating
mechanisms [12], we show that random initialization alone can induce suf-
ficient diversity to enhance performance. Deep ensembles have been shown
to improve accuracy, uncertainty calibration, and out-of-distribution robust-
ness [13, 14, 15, 16]; we adapt this principle for the specific challenge of
long-horizon PDE forecasting.
    We evaluate our ensemble strategy on three representative PDE systems:
(i) stress field evolution in a two-phase microstructure under increasing strain
(solid mechanics), (ii) the shallow water equations (fluid dynamics), and (iii)
the Gray-Scott reaction–diffusion (chemical kinetics). These problems span
a range of dynamical behaviors - from smooth deformations to wave prop-
agation and pattern formation. In all cases, our ensemble-based surrogates
consistently outperform single-model rollouts in long-horizon accuracy, with-
out requiring any architectural modification, memory augmentation, or ad-
ditional training objectives.

2. Methods
    Consider a 2D physical field p(x, y, t) defined over a continuous spa-
tiotemporal domain, subjected to an external time-dependent forcing func-
tion e(t). Numerical solutions typically assume a discretization of p(x, y, t)
as p(x, y, t), where the components of vectors x, y, and t are xi : i ∈
1, 2, . . . , Nx , yj : j ∈ 1, 2, . . . , Ny , and tk : k ∈ 1, . . . , NT , Nx × Ny are the
spatial grid dimensions and NT is the number of time steps. Assuming uni-

                                            3
form discretization xi = i∆x, yj = j∆y, tk = k∆t, where ∆x, ∆y, and ∆t
are the spatial and temporal resolutions, respectively. The forcing function
e(t) is similarly discretized as e(t), or e(tk ). In particular, numerical solvers
attempt to find the solution at the next future state p(x, y, tk+1 ) based on
the solution history p(x, y, tk ) : k ∈ 1, . . . NT − 1 and the forcing function
e(tk+1 ) : k ∈ 1, . . . NT − 1. Representing the full-time history of both the so-
lution and the forcing function is typically infeasible; therefore, the solution
is simplified through the use of state variables that provide a reduced-order
representation of the forcing function and solution history. Such an approach
allows the solution p(x, y, tk+1 ) to be found based only on the solution at
the previous time step tk , the current values of the state variables, and the
current value of the forcing function e(tk+1 ). Even with this simplified rep-
resentation, calculation of the solution and the state variables at each time
step is typically expensive, for example, requiring solutions involving high-
dimensional matrices and iterative solvers.
    More recently, ML representations of the solution have proven to be much
more efficient, with accuracy approaching that of the physics-based numer-
ical solvers. Researchers have proposed sequence-to-sequence mapping ap-
proaches using transformer [17, 18, 19, 20], CNNs [21], or Long Short Term
Memory (LSTM) [22] architectures to predict full trajectory rollouts. But
such an approach assumes that the external conditions for the full simulation
time are known in advance, limiting the real-world applicability. A more re-
alistic approach is to predict the solution field for one time step at a time,
using the historical information from previous time steps (autoregressive).
    Specifically, consider an autoregressive ML surrogate model trained for
the temporal evolution of the solution field. Mathematically, this is expressed
as:
                        p(x, y, tk+1 ) = M{p(x, y, tk ) , e(tk+1 )},           (1)
where M denotes the ML-model. To avoid the need to calculate and track
state variables, the accuracy of this autoregressive model is improved by
considering not just one previous time step, but the previous L time step
history, assuming that this subset of time steps contains a sufficient amount
of the information necessary to make an accurate prediction for the next time
step [23, 24]. This transforms Eq. 1 into,

               p(x, y, tk+1 ) = M{p(x, y, tk−L:k ) , e(tk−L:k+1 )},           (2)

where p(x, y, tk−L:k ) are the 2D maps of the physical field in the previous L

                                        4
time steps and e(tk−L:k+1 ) is the subset of the forcing function values in the
L previous time steps and the current time step.




Figure 1: Schematic representation of the Diffusion-inspired Temporal Trans-
former Operator for spatiotemporal field prediction.

    The training data, Dtrain , is formed as tuples of the form: {p(x, y, tk−(L−1):k ),
e(tk−(L−1):k+1 ), p(x, y, tk+1 )} ∀ k ∈ (L, NT − 1). This creates a total of
Ns ∗ (NT − L) training samples, where Ns is the total number of unique tra-
jectories simulated (either with variation only in initial conditions, external
time-dependent variable, or both). The model is trained by empirical risk
minimization,                           X
                    M∗ = arg min              L(M(pi ), pi ),                  (3)
                                M∈M
                                      pi ∈Dtrain

where M∗ is the choice of model parametrized by a set of weights within
the entire model space M that minimizes an appropriate loss function L(·)
evaluated over all the training data pi ∈ Dtrain . The mean squared error is
chosen as the loss function in this work.
    In this work, we utilize the Diffusion-inspired Temporal Transformer Op-
erator (DiTTO) for temporal evolution of fields [25]. In this approach, the
time-dependent forcing function is encoded via a separate feedforward neu-
ral network (FNN) and this embedding is multiplied with each of the UNet
intermediate layers, conditioning the UNet on the time-dependent variable.


                                         5
Each block in the UNet consists of a convolutional layer with a residual con-
nection (ResNet block [26]). This is followed by a temporal attention layer
that captures dependencies across temporal features (physical fields at con-
secutive time instants represented as channels of an image). The attention
mechanism [27] is denoted as,

                                        Q · KT
                         attn = softmax( √      )V,                         (4)
                                           demb
where Q, K, V, and demb are the query, key, value, and the embedding dimen-
sionality, respectively. The matrices Q, K, and V are essentially learnable
representations of the input features obtained to extract self-dependencies
across either the spatial or temporal dimensions of the physical fields. The
embedding dimensionality normalizes the attention to avoid scaling issues
and stabilize training. A detailed illustration of DiTTO architecture is shown
in Fig. 1.
    At inference time, the ground truth for the first L time-steps is input to
the model M. The model predicts the field at the next time step. This is
repeated recursively, with the model taking the L recent model predictions
to predict the successive time-step. At the end of the inference process, the
entire trajectory prediction, p
                              b (x, y, tL+1:NT ), is obtained.

2.1. Deep ensemble for autoregressive predictions
    In autoregressive models for time-dependent systems, the predicted out-
put at one time step is fed back as input for the next. While effective, this
approach introduces a compounding error mechanism - small inaccuracies at
early steps can propagate and grow over time. One remedy is to use a deep
ensemble approach: an ensemble of models, each trained independently on
the same dataset but initialized with different random weights [13]. Rather
than selecting a single “best” model, retaining all trained models in an en-
semble offers several advantages: (i) different initializations explore distinct
regions of the function space, resulting in diverse yet accurate approxima-
tions; (ii) error accumulation in autoregressive inference is mitigated through
averaging; and (iii) no computational effort is wasted, as all trained models
contribute to the final prediction.
    Theoretical support for deep ensemble comprising of deep neural net-
works highlights their ability to capture multiple function modes due to ran-
dom initialization and non-convex loss landscapes [28]. Previous work has

                                       6
Algorithm 1 Ensemble Approach for Accurate Spatiotemporal Prediction.
 Training Phase:
 Step 0: Prepare the training dataset Dtr as a collection of tuples:

   Dtr = {(p(x, y, tk−L:k ), e(tk−L:k+1 ), p(x, y, tk+1 ))}               ∀ k ∈ [L, NT − 1]

  Step 1: Train an ensemble of N base models {Mi }Ni=1 , each initialized with
  different random weights. Each model Mi is trained on the same dataset
  Dtr to learn the mapping from inputs to the next time step prediction.

  Inference Phase:
  Step 2: Provide the ensemble with initial ground truth fields for the first
  L time steps:
                               p(x, y, t1:L )
  for k = L to NT − 1 do
     for i = 1 to N do
         Each model Mi predicts p(x, y, tk+1 ) from p(x, y, tk−L+1:k ):

                       b i (x, y, tk+1 ) = Mi (p(x, y, tk−L+1:k ))
                       p

     end for
     Compute the ensemble-averaged prediction:
                                                      N
                                               1 X
                       p
                       b final (x, y, tk+1 ) =       p
                                                     b i (x, y, tk+1 )
                                               N i=1

     Append p
            b final (x, y, tk+1 ) to the input sequence for the next prediction.
  end for
  Output: The ensemble-generated spatiotemporal predictions:

            {b
             pfinal (x, y, tL+1 ), p
                                   b final (x, y, tL+2 ), . . . , p
                                                                  b final (x, y, tNT )}




                                               7
explored ensembles in the context of neural operators for PDEs, using inde-
pendently trained trunk networks to enhance generalization in static (single
time-step) predictions [29]. Building on this idea, we extend the deep en-
semble paradigm to the dynamic setting, demonstrating its effectiveness for
a range of spatiotemporal field evolution problems. Our approach is outlined
in Algorithm 1.
    To explain the error improvement using the deep ensemble approach, let
each model prediction be written as,

                           Mn (z) = f (z) + ϵn (z),                       (5)

where M(z) is the output of the nth base model for a given input z, f (z) is
the true output for z, and ϵn (z) is the error by the nth base model for the
input. The mean squared error for each model (MSEn ) is denoted as,

                     Ez [ϵn (z)2 ] = Ez [(Mn (z) − f (z))2 ],             (6)

where Ez (·) is the expectation operator. The MSE of the ensemble can be
written as,
                                      N
                                   1 X
                    MSEens = Ez [(       Mi (z) − f (z))2 ],         (7)
                                   N i=1
This expression can be decomposed into the correlated and uncorrelated
components as
           N
         1 X                          1 X
MSEens = 2    Ez [(Mi (z)−f (z))2 ] + 2     Ez [(Mi (z)−f (z))(Mj (z)−f (z))].
        N i=1                        N i̸=j
                                                                      (8)
Consider the hypothetical case that all model errors have zero mean (zero
bias assumption) and are uncorrelated (independent). Then the ensemble
error is only the first term in Eq. 8,
                         N                               N
                     1 X                            1 1 X
        MSElower
           ens =
                                                2
                            Ez [(Mi (z) − f (z)) ] = (      MSEi )        (9)
                    N 2 i=1                         N N i=1

which is exactly 1/N times the MSE averaged over all individual models.
This is the theoretical lower bound on the ensemble error. Conversely, if all



                                        8
models are perfectly correlated (i.e., errors are identical), the ensemble MSE
reduces to the mean of individual MSEs (see [30] for proof):
                                           N
                                       1 X
                          MSEupper
                             ens   =         MSEi                        (10)
                                       N i=1

Eqns. 9 and 10 together bound the ensemble MSE. Given that our approach
has models with the same architecture and trained on the same data, it is un-
likely that the models are uncorrelated. Hence, the total ensemble MSE shall
also contain the term due to interaction between models as given in Eq. 8.
The diversity between different models (second term in Eq. 8) determines the
relative performance of the ensemble approach. This diversity depends on
the training data, individual base models, and the overall optimization pro-
cess, and analyzing that is beyond the scope of this work. Nevertheless, we
demonstrate for a variety of spatiotemporal datasets, that the deep ensemble
approach outperforms all the individual base models.

3. Datasets
   In this work, we have demonstrated the deep ensemble approach on three
high-dimensional PDEs. The details for all 3 datasets are summarized in
Table. 1. Each dataset is discussed in detail in the subsequent subsections.
Each dataset has different spatiotemporal variations and hence presents a
unique set of challenges.

  Table 1: Details of the spatiotemporal datasets considered in this work

 Dataset                   Trajectories Timesteps       Input        Output
                                                         field         field
 2-phase microstructure        120             33    σxx history    σxx future
 (stress field: σxx )                                   +           time-step
                                                      load path
 Gray-Scott diffusion         1200             33     A history     A future
 (species conc: A)                                                  time-step
 Shallow Water                 120             33     ux history    ux future
 Equation                                                           time-step
 (velocity field: ux )



                                       9
Figure 2: 2-phase microstructure dataset: The top row illustrates a repre-
sentative two-phase microstructure, the applied boundary conditions, and
a sample load path generated using Algorithm 2. The bottom row shows
the evolution of the stress tensor component (σxx ) at selected time steps
t = 1, T /3, 2T /3, T with T = 100 for the load path shown in solid deep
blue line.


3.1. Stress field prediction in a 2-Phase microstructure
    The first dataset comprises 2D two-phase microstructures subjected to
time-dependent external loading (dynamic load paths), resulting in a spa-
tiotemporally varying stress field. Spatial variation arises from the random
placement of elastic fibers within the microstructure, while temporal varia-
tion is driven by the evolving external load. This setup, previously studied
in [21], was used to validate a UNet-based model for quasi-static prediction
of stress and strain under fixed load paths.
    In this work, we consider multiple realizations of such microstructures,
each containing 20 identical elastic fibers randomly embedded within an elas-
tic perfectly-plastic matrix. The fibers, of constant radius, occupy 40% of the

                                      10
microstructural volume. Each configuration is subjected to uniaxial (u1 (t))
and shear (u2 (t)) displacements on the right boundary, as illustrated in Fig. 2.
The left boundary is pinned, and the top and bottom edges are traction-free.
    To simplify, both tensile and shear components follow randomly generated
monotonically increasing load paths, generated as described in Algorithm 2.
Each load path begins at zero strain, with the final strain sampled from a
uniform distribution. A few intermediate time points are sampled to form a
strictly increasing sequence, and a cubic interpolator [31] is applied to obtain
a smooth monotonic curve. This procedure is repeated to generate a diverse
set of load paths, as illustrated in Fig. 2.

Algorithm 2 Load Path Generation for 2-Phase Microstructure.
 Initialize:
    Number of discrete time steps T = 100
    Number of control points Nctrl = 5
    Initialize strain array L ∈ RT with zeros
    Initialize time array X ∈ RT with zeros
    Set L[1] = 0, X[1] = 0
    Sample final strain: L[T ] ∼ U(0.07, 0.11)
    Set X[T ] = T

  Sample intermediate control points:
  for i = 2 to Nctrl − 1 do
     Sample L[i] ∼ U(L[i − 1], L[T ])                       ▷ Monotonic strain
     Sample X[i] ∼ U(X[i − 1], X[T ])                        ▷ Monotonic time
  end for

  Fit interpolator:
  Fit a monotonic cubic interpolator (e.g., Fritsch–Carlson) to
  {X[1 : Nctrl ], L[1 : Nctrl ]}
  Evaluate interpolator to obtain full strain trajectory L[1 : T ]

   Stress distributions are calculated using the ABAQUS finite element soft-
ware [32], assuming a J2 plasticity model without hardening, where the yield
function is defined as,              p
                             f (S) = 3J2 − σy ,                         (11)



                                       11
and J2 is defined as,
                                        1
                                  J2 = S : S                             (12)
                                        2
where S is the deviatoric part of the Cauchy stress tensor and σy = 210 MPa
is the yield strength of the material. The Young’s modulus for the matrix
and fiber are set to 3.2 GPa and 87 GPa, respectively. The Poisson’s ratio
for the matrix and fiber are set to 0.35 and 0.20, respectively. Additionally,
the model assumes small-strain conditions, which allows the additive decom-
position of the strain tensor into elastic and plastic components as shown in
Eq. 13.
                                  ε = εe + εp                            (13)
     The simulations use an irregular mesh with 86000 elements on average to
resolve the smaller regions between two fibers. The full dataset can be found
at [33]. A mesh convergence study of this finite element model can be found
in [21]. After the simulation, the stress fields obtained are interpolated on
a regular square grid (Nx × Ny = 128 × 128) for implementation in the ML
model. For model training, the first time instant (t = 0) corresponding to no
external strain is discarded and then we subsample the load path by 3 (i.e.,
NT = 33).
     One example of a generated load path and its corresponding stress field
simulation (with dimensions Nx × Ny × NT ) is illustrated in Fig. 2, where
intermediate time steps are uniformly spaced. The time axis is normalized,
i.e., each load path is represented by T discrete values between 0 and 1,
which are then used as input to the simulation model. The solid blue curve
indicates the specific load path for which the spatial stress field evolution
is visualized. Stress maps at selected time instances t = 1, T /3, 2T /3, T ,
marked by red circles, are shown alongside the load path. For training and
testing the model, the stress field is subsampled in time by a factor of 3,
resulting in Nt = 33 total time steps. Obtaining full-field stress data from
ABAQUS for a single time-step requires 1.6s, while the inference time for the
deep ensemble approach is 9x faster. In this work, we focus on predicting the
evolution of a single stress component (σxx ); however, the framework can be
easily extended to include other stress tensor components.

3.2. Gray-Scott reaction diffusion
    The Gray-Scott reaction diffusion model [34] describes systems thatare
commonly found in many biological and chemical species where chemical


                                     12
Figure 3: Gray-Scott reaction diffusion dataset: Species A concentration
shown for a random initial condition and Gray-Scott parameters F = 0.098,
K = 0.057 at time steps t = 1, T /3, 2T /3, T , with T = 33 on the simulation
trajectory.


reactions interact with a spatial diffusion process. Let us consider two chem-
ical species A and B interacting with each other in a closed domain. The
Gray-Scott reaction diffusion model describes the variation of chemical con-
centration of both species over space and time as:
                      ∂A
                         = δA ∆A − AB 2 + f (1 − A),                      (14)
                      ∂t
                      ∂B
                         = δB ∆B + AB 2 − (f + k)B.                       (15)
                      ∂t
In the above system, f and k are the feed and kill parameters, respectively.
Specifically, f controls the rate at which species A is added to the system,
and k controls the rate at which species B is removed from the system. δA
and δB control the diffusion rate of each species and are set to 2 × 10−5 and
1 × 10−5 , respectively, for the simulations.
     The simulation data is obtained from [35]. Eqs. 14 - 15 are simulated with
a higher order spectral difference method on the spatial domain [−1, −1] ×
[1, 1] with periodic boundary conditions and ∆t = 10s. At each time step,
the simulation is represented as a regular grid of size 128 × 128, with 200
initial conditions (random Gaussian clusters), and 6 different combinations of
f and k parameters are considered for the simulations. This leads to a diverse
dataset (200 × 6 = 1200 unique patterns). The details of the 6 combinations
of f and k parameters are detailed in Table. 2. We demonstrate our approach


                                      13
for predicting the evolution of the species A chemical concentration for the
first Nt = 33 simulation timesteps.

Table 2: Parameter combinations considered for the dataset generation of
the Gray-Scott reaction diffusion system.
                          F           K   Pattern
                        0.014       0.054 Gliders
                        0.098       0.057 Bubbles
                        0.029       0.057  Maze
                         0.03       0.062  Spots
                        0.058       0.065 Worms
                        0.018       0.051 Spirals


3.3. Shallow Water Equation
    The shallow water equations are a 2D approximation of a 3D incompress-
ible fluid flow when horizontal length scales are much larger than vertical
length scales. They are obtained by numerically depth integrating the in-
compressible Navier-Stokes equation. These equations are crucial to validate
atmospheric dynamics [36]. Specifically, we consider the rotating forced hy-
perviscous spherical shallow water equation,
                 ∂u
                    = −u · ∇u − g∇h − ν∇4 u − 2Ω × u,                   (16)
                 ∂t
                   ∂h
                      = −H∇ · u − ∇ · (hu) − ν∇4 h + F,                  (17)
                   ∂t
where u is the velocity vector field, h is the deviation of pressure surface
height from the mean, H is the mean height, Ω is the Coriolis factor, and
F is the forcing term to induce double periodicity (daily and annual). The
∇4 term corresponds to the hyperviscosity term. Spherical boundary con-
ditions and periodic forcing term are adopted in this simulation to create a
simpler proxy for real-world atmospheric dynamics. The initial conditions
are sampled from hPa 500 level in ERA5 [37].
    The dataset used in this work has been previously introduced in an atmo-
spherical dynamics prediction study using Fourier Neural Operator (FNO)[38]
and a comprehensive dataset study [35]. The dataset consists of 120 trajec-
tories with ∆t = 1 hour in simulation time. The data is simulated on an

                                     14
Figure 4: Shallow-water equation results (Shallow Water equation dataset):
The velocity field component ux is visualized at four key time instants along
the simulation trajectory - t = {1, T3 , 2T
                                          3
                                            , T }, with T = 33. These snapshots
capture the spatiotemporal evolution of the flow dynamics throughout the
simulation.


equiangular grid with ϕ ∈ [0, 2π] and θ ∈ [0, π]. At each time-step, the high-
dimensional simulation is represented as a 256 × 512 2D image corresponding
to the equiangular spatial domain. We demonstrate our approach for the
evolution of the velocity vector field component ux for the first Nt = 33
simulation timesteps.

3.4. Temporal information processing
    As explained in Sec. 2, the base models in the deep ensemble are con-
ditioned on time via an embedding of the temporal information. For each
dataset, the temporal input has two parts: time-IDs and the external forc-
ing input. For the 2-phase microstructure dataset, the temporal input is
a 1D vector of size 2(L + 1), consisting of the external forcing input values
e(tk−(L−1):k+1 ) - that is, the load values over the previous L time steps and the
next time step, along with the corresponding discrete time IDs (tk−(L−1):k+1 ),
as illustrated in Fig. 1.
    For the Gray-Scott reaction-diffusion dataset, the temporal input is a
1D vector of size (L + 1) + 2, comprising the previous L time IDs plus the
next one and the external forcing input (comprising of parameters f and k
values from Eqs. 14–15). Note that while f and k are constant over time,
their combination with different initial conditions leads to a distinct set of
patterns.
    For the Shallow Water equation dataset, the temporal input is a 1D vector
of size (L + 1), representing the previous L and the next time IDs. There is
no external forcing input in this case, as the only source of variability is due


                                       15
to differences in initial conditions.
    The final temporal embedding u(t) is defined as:

                      u(t) = FNNemb (t) || FNNvar (e(t))),                    (18)

where FNNemb (t) is the time-ID embedding, FNNvar (e(t)) is the forcing input
embedding, and || denotes vector concatenation.
    The component FNNemb (t) encodes time IDs using a sinusoidal positional
embedding - used in NLP to represent token positions-followed by two fully
connected layers with Gaussian Error Linear Unit (GeLU) activation. The
resulting output is a 1D vector of size 1 × 32 (output dimension obtained
after hyperparameter tuning). The sinusoidal embedding is computed as:
                                                
                       t                    t
     si (t) = sin               || cos               , for i = 1, . . . , dt , (19)
                    10000i/dt            10000i/dt
where dt is the embedding dimension.
    The external forcing input e(t) is embedded using FNNvar (e(t)), which
consists of two linear layers with a GeLU activation in between. The output
is also a 1D vector of size 1 × 32 (output dimension obtained after hyperpa-
rameter tuning). As described in Sec. 2, the complete temporal embedding
u(t) is injected into each intermediate layer of the UNet. This is achieved by
reshaping u(t) and passing it through a 2D convolutional layer, ensuring the
number of filters matches the channel size of the intermediate UNet output.
For the Shallow Water equation dataset, which lacks time-varying external
inputs, the temporal embedding simplifies to only the time-ID embedding
(FNNemb (t)).

3.5. Deep Ensemble training
    For the 2-phase microstructure dataset, the time-varying load paths differ
between the training and testing datasets. In contrast, for the Gray-Scott and
Shallow Water equation datasets, the variability arises from different initial
conditions in training and testing data. The training datasets are standard-
ized for faster convergence during training. The test data are standardized
with the training data statistics.
    During training, we use a batch size of 8. At test time, predictions are
generated in an autoregressive manner to reconstruct the full trajectory. Ac-
cordingly, the test-time batch size is set to Nt − L, where Nt is the trajectory
length for the given dataset and L is the temporal history length. We set

                                        16
L = 3 (number of previous time-steps to be used as model input) for all
datasets. In general, we recommend choosing 3 ≤ L ≤ 10 to balance the
trade-off between predictive accuracy and the amount of ground truth re-
quired at test time.
    To mitigate overfitting, we apply L2 -norm regularization to the model
weights during training. All base models are trained for 100 epochs using
the Adam optimizer with a learning rate of 0.0001 and default hyperparam-
eters. Our primary goal is not to optimize performance for each individual
dataset, but rather to demonstrate the effectiveness of the ensemble approach
compared to standalone models. Training for 100 epochs is sufficient to en-
sure convergence to a stable optimum.
    It is noted that for a fair comparison of numerical solvers with data-
driven surrogate models, the model training time should also be accounted
for. Since the deep ensemble models are randomly initialized and do not share
any parameters, they can be trained/used in parallel on multiple GPUs. In
this work, the models are trained on a GPU cluster node (each node has 4
Nvidia A100 GPUs with 40GB of memory each). For the 3 datasets, the
average training time on GPU is ≈ 4.5 hours for one model. After training,
the models can be used at inference time for every new test sample without
any retraining.

4. Results
   The performance of the deep ensemble approach for all 3 datasets is com-
pared qualitatively by visualizing the physical field predictions at select time-
steps on the simulation trajectory. A quantitative comparison of the deep
ensemble approach and individual models is presented next. The relative L2
norm error (RLE) is defined as,
                                          Ntest
                                     1 X        ∥pi (x, y, t) − p
                                                                b i (x, y, t)∥2
   RLE(p(x, y, t), p
                   b (x, y, t)) =                                                 (20)
                                    Ntest i=1          ∥pi (x, y, t)∥2

The mean absolute error (MAE) is defined as,
                                     Ntest
                                1 X         1    X
MAE(p(x, y, t), p
                b (x, y, t)) =                       |pi (x, y, t) − pbi (x, y, t)|,
                               Ntest i=1 Nx ∗ Ny x,y
                                                                                  (21)


                                        17
where Ntest is the size of the test dataset. Both metrics are computed sep-
arately at each time step t since we are interested in evaluating the perfor-
mance of the approaches over time.




Figure 5: 2-phase microstructure stress field prediction with the deep en-
semble (top), reference FEM solution (middle row), and absolute error map
(bottom) at t = {L + 1, T4 , T2 , T } time steps of the simulation trajectory.


4.1. 2-phase microstructure
    Fig. 5 shows the predictions with the deep ensemble approach at selected
time-steps along the simulation trajectory. There is a remarkable similarity
between the ground truth simulations (reference finite element solution) and
the ensemble predictions. The absolute error is low except at a few points
on the fiber-matrix interfaces.
    The performance metrics with the deep ensemble approach are illustrated
in Fig. 6. As illustrated in Fig. 6(a), at the end of the simulation trajectory,
RLE metric with the deep ensemble approach is 0.0987, which is 18 to 28%

                                      18
Figure 6: Performance metrics for the 2-phase microstructure dataset (a).
RLE and (b). MAE.


less than the RLE range with individual models (0.120 to 0.137). Similarly,
Fig. 6(b) demonstrates that at the end of the simulation trajectory, the MAE
metric is at least 20% less than the best-performing individual model (Model
2 in this case). Both comparisons show that the deep ensemble approach
helps to mitigate error accumulation in an autoregressive setting.

4.2. Gray-Scott reaction diffusion
    The results for the Gray-Scott diffusion reaction dataset, illustrated in
(Fig. 7), show more significant errors in the prediction. Specifically, a few
of the patterns are mispredicted by the data-driven model at later timesteps
(t=25 onwards), with the data-driven model predicting regions of very low
species concentration that are not present in the ground-truth data. The deep
ensemble approach improves the model predictions, with the RLE at the end
of the trajectory being 0.085, which is 5 to 30% less than the RLE metric
range with individual models (0.095 to 0.12), see Fig. 8(a). Similarly, the
MAE metric with the deep ensemble approach is at least 14% less compared
to an individual model (best performing Model-3), as illustrated in Fig. 8(b).

4.3. Shallow water equation
    Fig. 9 shows the predictions with the deep ensemble approach for the Shal-
low Water equation dataset. This illustration shows higher error in regions
with complicated patterns (top center of the spatial dimensions). Towards
the end of the simulation trajectory, the data-driven model is unable to cap-
ture all the patterns in the data. Indeed, researchers have demonstrated the

                                     19
Figure 7: Gray-Scott reaction species concentration with the deep ensemble
(top row), reference analytical solution (middle row), and absolute error map
(bottom row) at t = {L + 1, T4 , T2 , T } time steps of the simulation trajectory.


inability of data-driven surrogate models to capture high-frequency patterns
in physical systems [39] (spectral bias). Note that it is inherently impossible
for a data-driven surrogate model to capture all the subtleties of the physical
system. The objective of this work is to showcase the advantage of using the
deep ensemble instead of individual models.
    Due to the complicated nature of the dataset, we expect the error metrics
to be higher. As illustrated in Fig. 10(a), with the deep ensemble approach,
the RLE at the end of the simulation trajectory is 0.73, which is 10 to 30%
less than the RLE range with individual models (0.81 to 1.018). The MAE
metric with the deep ensemble approach is at least 15% less compared to the
individual models (best performing model 4), as illustrated in Fig. 10(b).



                                       20
Figure 8: Performance metrics for the Gray-Scott diffusion reaction dataset
(a). RLE and (b). MAE.




Figure 9: Shallow Water equation velocity field prediction with the deep en-
semble (top row), reference FEM solution (middle row), and absolute error
map (bottom row) at t = {L + 1, T4 , T2 , T } time steps of the simulation tra-
jectory with L = 3, T = 33 being the time history input to the model and
total simulation steps respectively.




                                      21
Figure 10: Performance metrics for the Shallow Water equation dataset (a).
RLE and (b). MAE.




Figure 11: Performance comparison of the deep ensemble approach and
model with highest MAE and lowest MAE respectively for: 2-phase mi-
crostructure dataset (a, d); Gray Scott diffusion reaction dataset (b, e);
Shallow Water equation dataset (c, f).


4.4. Analysis of the deep ensemble framework
    As noted in Sec . 2.1, the ensemble error decreases as the correlation
between individual model errors decreases. Given that all the base models
share the same architecture and parameters, the difference in performance
can be attributed to the complexity of the individual datasets. This likely

                                    22
gives rise to different degrees of independence between individual models.
   Fig. 11 compares the best and worst performing models v/s the deep
ensemble approach for all three datasets (in terms of MAE metric). On
average over all 3 datasets, the deep ensemble approach has a 33% lesser
MAE compared to the worst-performing individual model and 15% lesser
MAE compared to the best-performing model. This comparison underscores
the observation that the deep ensemble approach always outperforms the
best individual model and, on average, provides substantial improvement in
performance.




Figure 12: Performance comparison for different numbers of base models in
the ensemble approach for Gray-Scott diffusion reaction dataset: (a). RLE
and (b). MAE.

    Clearly, the results using the deep ensemble approach will improve on
average, as the number of base models in the ensemble is increased, but the
requisite computational effort will increase. To investigate this effect, Fig. 12
illustrates the performance metrics for a varying number of base models in
the deep ensemble for the Gray-Scott reaction diffusion dataset. We observe
that an increasing number of base models leads to improved performance
(increasing the number of models from 2 to 8 improves the MAE by 28%).
However, after a saturation point, further increases in the number of models
(8 to 16) do not lead to substantial improvement in performance. The number
of base models in the deep ensemble has to be chosen based on a tradeoff
between improvement in performance and time and memory requirement to
train and store all base models respectively.



                                       23
5. Conclusions
    Traditional numerical solvers for time-dependent PDEs provide high-
fidelity results but are often too computationally intensive for real-time or
many-query applications. While ML surrogates offer a scalable alternative,
autoregressive implementations are prone to error accumulation over long
horizons-compromising their reliability in practical deployments.
    In this work, we demonstrate that a simple ensemble strategy-based solely
on random weight initialization-can significantly reduce long-term prediction
error in autoregressive ML surrogates. By training multiple models on the
same data with different initializations and averaging their predictions, we
effectively mitigate the compounding errors typical of single-model rollouts.
Across three diverse PDE systems-elastic stress evolution, shallow water dy-
namics, and reaction-diffusion chemistry-our ensemble approach improves
predictive stability by 15–33%, without requiring any architectural modifi-
cations, memory modules, or retraining overhead. The effectiveness of our
method stems from its ability to harness the stochasticity of neural net-
work training. Each model in the ensemble converges to a different local
minimum, and their aggregated predictions offer improved generalization
and robustness to initialization-induced bias. The result is a lightweight,
architecture-agnostic enhancement that retains the computational speed of
ML surrogates, making it particularly attractive for real-time simulation in
scientific and engineering workflows.
    Looking forward, our ensembling framework opens up several directions
for future work. One avenue is to integrate physics-informed constraints or
inductive biases to further regularize ensemble outputs. Another promising
direction is to explore ensemble diversity not just through random initial-
ization but also via controlled variations in hyperparameters, architectures,
or data augmentation-pushing the method toward more adaptive and robust
surrogate modeling.

6. Acknowledgements
I.K., S.G., and L.G.B. are supported by the U.S. Department of Energy,
Office of Science, Office of Advanced Scientific Computing Research, grant
under Award Number DE-SC0024162. I.S. and L.G.B were supported by the
Army Research Laboratory under Cooperative Agreement Number W911NF-
12-2-0023, W911NF-12-2-0022, and W911NF-22-2-0014. The computational


                                     24
experiments were carried out at the Advanced Research Computing at Hop-
kins (ARCH) core facility (rockfish.jhu.edu) hosted by Johns Hopkins Uni-
versity, which is supported by the National Science Foundation (NSF) grant
number OAC 1920103. The views and conclusions contained in this docu-
ment are those of the authors and should not be interpreted as representing
the official policies, either expressed or implied, of the Army Research Lab-
oratory or the U.S. Government. The U.S. Government is authorized to
reproduce and distribute reprints for Government purposes, notwithstanding
any copyright notation herein.

References
 [1] L. Lu, P. Jin, G. Pang, Z. Zhang, G. E. Karniadakis, Learning nonlinear
     operators via DeepONet based on the universal approximation theorem
     of operators, Nature machine intelligence 3 (2021) 218–229.

 [2] Z. Li, N. B. Kovachki, K. Azizzadenesheli, K. Bhattacharya, A. Stuart,
     A. Anandkumar, et al., Fourier Neural Operator for Parametric Par-
     tial Differential Equations, in: International Conference on Learning
     Representations, 2021.

 [3] S. Goswami, A. D. Jagtap, H. Babaee, B. T. Susi, G. E. Karniadakis,
     Learning stiff chemical kinetics using extended deep neural operators,
     Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 419 (2024)
     116674.

 [4] W. Diab, M. Al-Kobaisi, Temporal Neural Operator for Modeling
     Time-Dependent Physical Phenomena, arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.20249
     (2025).

 [5] H. Robinson, S. Pawar, A. Rasheed, O. San, Physics guided neural
     networks for modelling of non-linear dynamics, Neural Networks 154
     (2022) 333–345.

 [6] D. Nayak, S. Goswami, TI-DeepONet: Learnable Time Integration
     for Stable Long-Term Extrapolation, arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.17341
     (2025).

 [7] K. Michalowska, S. Goswami, G. E. Karniadakis, S. Riemer-Sørensen,
     Neural operator learning for long-time integration in dynamical systems

                                     25
    with recurrent neural networks, in: 2024 International Joint Conference
    on Neural Networks (IJCNN), IEEE, 2024, pp. 1–8.

 [8] J. He, S. Kushwaha, J. Park, S. Koric, D. Abueidda, I. Jasiuk, Sequen-
     tial deep operator networks (S-deeponet) for predicting full-field solu-
     tions under time-dependent loads, Engineering Applications of Artificial
     Intelligence 127 (2024) 107258.

 [9] I. Sutskever, J. Martens, G. Dahl, G. Hinton, On the importance of ini-
     tialization and momentum in deep learning, in: International conference
     on machine learning, PMLR, 2013, pp. 1139–1147.

[10] J. Huang, H.-T. Yau, Dynamics of deep neural networks and neural
     tangent hierarchy, in: International conference on machine learning,
     PMLR, 2020, pp. 4542–4551.

[11] L. Breiman, Random forests, Machine learning 45 (2001) 5–32.

[12] R. A. Jacobs, M. I. Jordan, S. J. Nowlan, G. E. Hinton, Adaptive
     mixtures of local experts, Neural computation 3 (1991) 79–87.

[13] B. Lakshminarayanan, A. Pritzel, C. Blundell, Simple and scalable
     predictive uncertainty estimation using deep ensembles, Advances in
     neural information processing systems 30 (2017).

[14] Z. Zou, Z. Wang, G. E. Karniadakis, Learning and discovering multiple
     solutions using physics-informed neural networks with random initial-
     ization and deep ensemble, arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.06320 (2025).

[15] I. D. Khurjekar, J. B. Harley, Sim-to-real localization: Environment
     resilient deep ensemble learning for guided wave damage localization,
     The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 151 (2022) 1325–1336.

[16] T. Tripura, S. Chakraborty, A foundational neural operator that con-
     tinuously learns without forgetting, arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.18885
     (2023).

[17] Z. Li, D. Shu, A. Barati Farimani, Scalable transformer for PDE surro-
     gate modeling, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 36
     (2023) 28010–28039.


                                     26
[18] A. Hemmasian, A. B. Farimani, Multi-scale time-stepping of partial
     differential equations with transformers, Computer Methods in Applied
     Mechanics and Engineering 426 (2024) 116983.

[19] H. Wu, H. Luo, H. Wang, J. Wang, M. Long, Transolver: A fast
     transformer solver for pdes on general geometries, arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2402.02366 (2024).

[20] N. Geneva, N. Zabaras, Transformers for modeling physical systems,
     Neural Networks 146 (2022) 272–289.

[21] I. Saha, A. Gupta, L. Graham-Brady, Prediction of local elasto-plastic
     stress and strain fields in a two-phase composite microstructure using
     a deep convolutional neural network, Computer Methods in Applied
     Mechanics and Engineering 421 (2024) 116816.

[22] K. Michalowska, S. Goswami, G. E. Karniadakis, S. Riemer-Sørensen,
     DON-LSTM: Multi-resolution learning with DeepONets and long short-
     term memory neural networks, arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.02491 (2023).

[23] V. Oommen, K. Shukla, S. Goswami, R. Dingreville, G. E. Karniadakis,
     Learning two-phase microstructure evolution using neural operators and
     autoencoder architectures, npj Computational Materials 8 (2022) 190.

[24] Q. Cao, S. Goswami, T. Tripura, S. Chakraborty, G. E. Karniadakis,
     Deep neural operators can predict the real-time response of floating
     offshore structures under irregular waves, Computers & Structures 291
     (2024) 107228.

[25] O. Ovadia, V. Oommen, A. Kahana, A. Peyvan, E. Turkel, G. E. Kar-
     niadakis, Real-time inference and extrapolation via a diffusion-inspired
     temporal transformer operator (ditto), arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.09072
     (2023).

[26] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, J. Sun, Deep residual learning for image
     recognition, in: Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision
     and pattern recognition, 2016, pp. 770–778.

[27] A. Vaswani, N. Shazeer, N. Parmar, J. Uszkoreit, L. Jones, A. N. Gomez,
     L. Kaiser, I. Polosukhin, Attention is all you need, Advances in neural
     information processing systems 30 (2017).

                                     27
[28] S. Fort, H. Hu, B. Lakshminarayanan, Deep ensembles: A loss landscape
     perspective, arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.02757 (2019).

[29] R. Sharma, V. Shankar, Ensemble and mixture-of-experts deeponets for
     operator learning, arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.11907 (2024).

[30] G. Brown, Ensemble Learning, Springer US, Boston, MA, 2010, pp.
     312–320. URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-0-387-30164-8_252.
     doi:10.1007/978-0-387-30164-8_252.

[31] F. N. Fritsch, J. Butland, A method for constructing local monotone
     piecewise cubic interpolants, SIAM journal on scientific and statistical
     computing 5 (1984) 300–304.

[32] E. J. Barbero, Finite element analysis of composite materials using
     Abaqus®, CRC press, 2023.

[33] I. D. Khurjekar, I. Saha, A. Gupta, L. Graham-Brady, S. Goswami,
     Data and code associated with the publication: Full field stress response
     in 2-phase microstructures under dynamic loading, 2025. URL: https:
     //doi.org/10.7281/T1X5ZYPI. doi:10.7281/T1X5ZYPI.

[34] P. Gray, S. K. Scott, Autocatalytic reactions in the isothermal, continu-
     ous stirred tank reactor: Oscillations and instabilities in the system a+
     2b→ 3b; b→ c, Chemical Engineering Science 39 (1984) 1087–1097.

[35] R. Ohana, M. McCabe, L. Meyer, R. Morel, F. Agocs, M. Beneitez,
     M. Berger, B. Burkhart, S. Dalziel, D. Fielding, et al., The well: a
     large-scale collection of diverse physics simulations for machine learning,
     Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 37 (2025) 44989–
     45037.

[36] D. L. Williamson, J. B. Drake, J. J. Hack, R. Jakob, P. N. Swarztrauber,
     A standard test set for numerical approximations to the shallow water
     equations in spherical geometry, Journal of computational physics 102
     (1992) 211–224.

[37] H. Hersbach, B. Bell, P. Berrisford, S. Hirahara, A. Horányi, J. Muñoz-
     Sabater, J. Nicolas, C. Peubey, R. Radu, D. Schepers, et al., The era5
     global reanalysis, Quarterly journal of the royal meteorological society
     146 (2020) 1999–2049.

                                      28
[38] M. McCabe, P. Harrington, S. Subramanian, J. Brown, Towards stabil-
     ity of autoregressive neural operators, arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.10619
     (2023).

[39] S. Wang, X. Yu, P. Perdikaris, When and why pinns fail to train: A
     neural tangent kernel perspective, Journal of Computational Physics
     449 (2022) 110768.




                                    29
