Intensity Modulated Radiation Fields Induce Protective Effects and
Reduce Importance of Dose-Rate Effects

Yusuke Matsuya1,2, Stephen J. McMahon3, Mihaela Ghita3, Yuji Yoshii4, Tatsuhiko Sato1, Hiroyuki
Date5 and Kevin M. Prise3
1
    Japan Atomic Energy Agency (JAEA), Nuclear Science and Engineering Center, Research Group for Radiation
    Transport Analysis, Tokai, Ibaraki, Japan
2
    Graduate School of Health Sciences, Hokkaido University, Sapporo, Hokkaido Japan
3
    Centre for Cancer Research and Cell Biology, Queen’s University Belfast, Belfast, UK
4
    Biological Research, Education and Instrumentation Center, Sapporo Medical University, Sapporo, Japan
5
    Faculty of Health Sciences, Hokkaido University, Sapporo, Hokkaiddo, Japan


Supplementary Information
I. Monte Carlo Simulation for yD Calculation
       The two Monte Carlo codes1,2 were used for obtaining the microdosimetric quantity of dose-mean
lineal energy yD for 225 kVp X-rays used in the main paper. To verify the sampling algorithm for
calculating yD value, we conducted a benchmark test comparing with the yD values by Geant4
simulation (version 4.8.2. p01) and those measured by tissue equivalent proportional counter (TEPC)3.
       We set the diameter of the sampling sphere (domain) to be 1.0 m, and calculated the yD values of
60
    Co -rays, 6MV-linac X-rays and 200 kVp X-rays. The geometries for the photon irradiations are
illustrated in Fig. S1, which were the same irradiation conditions as reported previously3. By using
Particle for Heavy Ion Transport Code System (PHITS ver. 3.02)1, we calculated the energy spectrum
of electrons at 6 mm depth from surface for 60Co -rays, at 10 cm depth from surface for 6 MV-linac
X-rays and at 1 mm depth from surface for 200 kVp X-rays, respectively. The cut-off energy was set
to be 1.0 keV through the PHITS simulation. The example of energy spectrum for 200 kVp X-rays is
shown in Fig. S2A. To reduce the calculation time effectively4, the phase-space file for VARIAN
Clinac 600C (10 x 10) was used as a source of 6 MV photons. Inputting the energy spectrum into the
in-house code WLTrack for electrons2, the energy deposition in a domain was sampled uniformly
along electron track as shown in Fig. S2B. It is noted that the cut-off energy of electrons was set to be
1.0 eV in the WLTrack calculation.
       According to International Commission on Radiation Units (ICRU) Report 365, the dose-mean
lineal energy represented by yD is defined as follows

                                                                                                       (S1)

                                                ∫ ( )d
                              ∫    ( )d                                                                (S2)
                                                ∫ ( )d
where y is lineal energy in keV/m, f(y) is the probability density of lineal energy and d(y) is dose
distribution of lineal energy. After obtaining the y-yd(y) distributions shown in Fig. S2C, we
calculated the yD values for 60Co -rays, 6MV-linac X-rays and 200 kVp X-rays.


                                                          1
 Figure S1. Illustration of geometries for calculating the yD values of 60Co -rays, 6 MV-linac
 X-rays and 200 kVp X-rays. The geometries were set to be the same as the previous report.3 Light
 blue area represents liquid water. The sampling points for 60Co -rays, 6 MV-linac X-rays and 200
 kVp X-rays were set at 6 mm depth, at 10 cm depth 1 mm depth from surface, respectively.




 Figure S2. Procedures for calculating the yD of photon irradiations. (A) is energy spectrum of
 electrons calculated by the PHITS code, (B) is sampling technique of energy deposition in a site,
 and (C) is the relation between y and yd(y) for 200 kVp X-rays.



                                              Dose-mean lineal energy yD (keV/m)
Photon beam type
                                  This work          Geant4 ver. 4.8.2. p01         TEPC
60
  Co -rays                     2.26 ± 0.01              2.24 ± 0.01            2.34 ± 0.03
6 MV-linac X-rays               2.28 ± 0.01              2.27 ± 0.08            2.36 ± 0.04
200 kVp X-rays                  4.44 ± 0.04              4.41 ± 0.08            4.51 ± 0.05
 Table S1. Comparison of yD value among this work, the previous calculation by Geant4 and
 TEPC measurement. This work reproduced the photon-energy dependence on yD value with
 domain size of 1.0 m diameter.




                                                2
   As listed in Table S1, the yD values for three types of photons agreed well with the recommended
values by Geant4 simulation and TEPC measurement3. As shown in Fig. S2C, the dose distribution of
lineal energy (y-d(y) relation) calculated in this study coincides with the previous distribution by
Gean4 simulation and the TEPC measurement3. These results mean that the sampling technique used
in this study is precise for calculating the yD value for photon irradiations.


II. Markov chain Monte Carlo for Determining Model Parameters
   The values of 0 and (a+c) were determined from the cell survival recovery curve in split-dose
experiment (Fig. 2 in the main paper). The rest of cell-specific parameters in the IMK model were
determined via a Monte chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) simulation established previously.6 Here, we
summarized the detail of MCMC technique.
   The Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) technique provides the probability density function
(PDF) of the model parameters.7,8 This simulation technique is a hierarchical model, and we can obtain
the PDF of model parameters following Markov property.9 In the present model, the prior distribution
of  = (0, b, b, ) was set to be normal distribution, with maximum likelihood (ML) value as mean
value and reasonable large uncertainty (such as 70% of the ML value) as standard deviation, to obtain
the updated posterior distribution with efficient computing performance. Assuming that the uncertainty
for –ln S follows the normal distribution, a likelihood function is given by,

                        |                   |
                                                            ex                                      (S3)
                                       {        ex [                        ]}
                                        √
where ND is the number of experimental data, Sexpi (i = 1 ~ ND) are the set of experimental survival for
the dose di, Scali (i = 1 ~ ND) are those of calculated survival by the present model, and  is the standard
deviation of ln S. The ratio of osterior robabi ity for the arameter’s ca didate at timi g of t+1)
 (candidate|d) and that for the previous condition (at timing of t)   ( (t)|d) is given by

                                       |
                                                                                                    (S4)
                                   |
This is the probability ratio to determine the set of model parameters at the next step, so called the
transition probability.9 The algorithm of MCMC used in this study is described in blue flow chart in
Fig. S3. By applying the IMK model to experimental cell survival (dose-response) curve after
single-dose exposure at 0.59 Gy/min, the set of model parameters  = (0, b, b, ) were determined.




                                                       3
  Figure S3. Procedure to determine model parameters. Red area of the flow chart represents the
  deduction of sub-lethal damage repair (SLDR) rate (a+c) and  values from experimental
  split-dose cell recovery curve (see the main paper). Blue area of the chart surrounded by dotted line
  is algorithm of Markov chain Monte Carlo simulation to determine the rest of model parameters  =
  (0, b,  b, ). Following this flow chart, we determined the set of model parameters  = (0, 0,
  (a+c) b, b, ) to demonstrate cell survival after single-dose and fractionated irradiations.


III. Clonogenicity of In-Field Cells under Modulated-Field Exposure
The dose-response curves on cell survival were evaluated by the clonogenic survival assay in the main
paper. To be sure that the different radio-sensitivity after half-field exposure, here we show the raw
image of the colony formed in this experiment.
   Figure S4 shows the raw image of colony formation assay, where A is the colonies of
non-irradiated DU145 cells (control group), B is those after 10 Gy exposure under full-field exposure,
and C is those after 10 Gy exposure under half-field exposure. Focusing on Fig. S4B and Fig. S4C, the
colony size of cells in-field under half field exposure (AIF = 0.5) is larger than that under uniform-field
exposure (AIF = 1.0).
   There are several types of the intercellular signals involved in the cell growth, i.e., transforming
growth factor-β    TGFβ .10 The different size of colony which is linked to the dose-response curve
can be explained by the reduced yield of DNA damage induction (Fig. 6B in the main paper).
However, the mechanisms to induce the modified DNA damage yield are still unclear. While keeping
in mind the increase of cell growth, further investigation for cell responses under modulated fields is
necessary in future study.




                                                    4
  Figure S4. Image of colonies formed after modulated-field and uniform-field exposure: A is
  the colonies of non-irradiated DU145 cells, B is those of the cells exposed to 10 Gy under uniform
  field, C is those of the cells exposed to 10 Gy under half field. Comparing the colony size formed
  after uniform-field exposure (Fig S4B) with that of in-field cells after half-field exposure (Fig S4C),
  it is suggested that the cell viability after half-field exposure is higher than that after the
  conventional uniform-field exposure.


IV. Verification of the IMK model for Intercellular Communication
   In this study, we incorporated the intercellular communication (IC) from in-field hit cells to
out-of-field non-hit cells into the cell-killing model so-ca ed “integrated microdosimetric-kinetic
(IMK) model”11,12. In the main paper, we show the formula of cell survival considering DNA-targeted
effects (TEs) and IC as the functions of absorbed dose in Gy. Here, we show several additional results
for verifying the developed model.
   Using model parameters listed in Table 1 in the main paper, we also calculated the dose
dependency on out-of-field cell survival based on the model for the cases of constant in-field doses 4.0
Gy or 8.0 Gy (Fig. S5). It is noted that the model formula considering DNA-TEs and IC is given as

                        T       (        )                       [                  ]           (S5)

                                                                      ( b   b)
                            T       [         b   b   F   b   F
                                                                  ]              b               (S6)


                         T          T                                                            (S7)

where ST and SNT are the surviving fraction of cells for DNA-TEs and IC (non-targeted effects),
respectively; (0, 0) for DNA-TEs and (b,  b) for IC are the cell-specific coefficients to dose (Gy)
and dose squared (Gy2); (a+c) mean the rate of SLDR (h-1);T is dose-delivery time (h); is
microdosimetric quantity given by  =yD/(rd2) in Gy,  and rd are the density of liquid water (1.0

                                                          5
g/cm3) and the radius of a domain considered in the model (set as 0.5 m); yD is dose-mean lineal
energy in keV/m; represents the yield of lethal lesions (LLs) in non-hit cells for IC; D* is absorbed
dose in which the symbol * means either in-field denoted as in-field as IF or out-of-field as OF. From
the comparison between the model prediction and the experimental data,13 the present model can
flexibly demonstrate the dose-response curve of out-of-field cell survival after the irradiation with
constant in-field dose as shown in Fig. S5.




  Figure S5. Model verification for dose-response curve of out-of-field cell survival at constant
  in-field dose with 4 Gy or 8 Gy in DU145 cell line. The solid lines were described by using the
  model proposed in this study (Eqs. (S5)-(S7)), whilst the experimental data (each symbol) is taken
  from the literature.13


   In addition, we also compared the model prediction with the experimental data13 for the case of the
treatment with 20 M aminoguanidine (AG) which is an inhibiter of nitric oxide as one of the
intercellular signals. It is noted that  value was set to be 0 under the conditions of IC inhibited case
(AG+). As shown in Fig. S6, even for the case of AG treatment, the model provides the increment of
surviving fraction due to the lack of IC, which suggests that the enhanced cell-killing of out-of-field
cells is attributed to IC (defined as radiation-induced bystander effects).
     Focusing on the model assumption that the signal effect can cover the entire region of out-of-field
under the half-field exposure, the distance for signal delivery is set to be much longer than the
previous reports.14,15 According to the previous report by Koizumi et al., a calcium wave can be
detected at distance below 90-100 m.14 Meanwhile, apoptosis cells can be observed at distance below
~800 m.15 Concerning this discrepancy, the previous studies14,15 used the three-dimensional tissue
model while our study was conducted using cell culture dishes. For this reason, the signals might

                                                     6
move freely in the culture medium after irradiation. Thus, it is necessary in future study to further
discuss the signal diffusion distances from the viewpoints of culture dish model and three-dimensional
tissue model.




  Figure S6. Model verification for the treatment with 20 M aminoguanidine (AG) in DU145
  cell line. Red bar represents the model estimation (Eqs. (S5)-(S7)), whilst the blue one is the
  experimental data taken from the literature.13


V. Estimation of Impact of Low-Energy Photons on Out-of-Field Cell Survival
   Applying the present model to in vitro experimental cell survival in the main paper, we evaluated
the impact of modulated radiation field on dose-rate effects and radio-sensitivity (dose-response curve
on cell survival). However, the lower energy scattered photons incident to out-of-field cells have a
potentiality to affect lager impact on biological effects than the photons incident to in-field cells. So,
we also evaluated the impact of the scattered X-rays on cell survival from the standpoint of
microdosimery.
   As shown in the main paper, the yD values for in-field cells and for out-of-field cells were 4.393 ±
0.007 keV/m and 4.769 ± 0.044 keV/m, respectively. To be sure the radiation quality in
out-of-field area, we also calculated the dose-averaged linear energy transfer (LET) by the use of the
PHITS code (ver. 3.02)1, and obtained the values for in-field cells and out-of-field cells were 1.346 ±
0.039 keV/m and 1.467 ± 0.285 keV/m, respectively. From the yD and dose-averaged LET values,
it is suggested that the density of energy deposited along the radiation track in lead-shielding area is
higher than that in in-field region.
   Regarding the calculated yD, we next estimated cell survival curve based on only DNA-targeted
effects (TEs) to discuss the impact of scattered photons on out-of-field cells. The formula of cell
survival curve for DNA-TEs after irradiation at a constant dose-rate is given by Eq. (S5). According to
the previous assumption of the conventional MK model, the parameters of 0 and 0 can be fixed

                                                    7
independent of radiation type and the energy16. Adopting the assumption, we tried to estimate the
dose-response curve by using Eq. (S5) and yD values for half-field exposure (Fig. 1A in the main
paper).




  Figure S7. Estimation of dose-response curve considering only DNA-TEs. To discuss the impact
  of scattered X-rays on out-of-field cell survival, we estimated the cell survival using Eq. (S5) and
  model parameters for modulated exposure listed in Table 1 of the main paper. Figure S7A is the
  survival curves of AGO1522 cells and Fig. S7B is those of DU145 cells. As shown in these results,
  there is no difference to enhance cell killing by scattered X-rays for the case of half-field exposure
  with 225 kVp X-rays.


   Figure S7 shows the model estimations of cell survival curve based on DNA-TEs in in-field cells
and out-of-field cells. Focusing on the survival curves after irradiation with 225 kVp X-rays in Figs.
S7A and S7B, the in-field cell survival curve (blue solid line with closed diamond) approximately
coincides with the out-of-field curve (red dotted line with triangle), which means that there is less
impact of low-energy photon on the enhancement of cell killing for the case of 225 kVp X-rays
irradiation. However, when the yD value decreases to be 2.36 keV/m (6MV-linac X-rays), there is
subtle difference of cell survival between 6MV-linac X-rays (green solid line with open diamond) and
225 kVp X-rays (the red and blue lines). Thus, the reduction of survival of out-of-field cells is
attributed to intercellular signalling from in-field cells to out-of-field cells from this model estimation.


VI. Application of Model Prediction to Clinical Dose Delivery
   The reduced importance of sub-lethal damage repair (SLDR) under exposure to modulated fields
was suggested in the main paper. To deepen the impact on clinical dose-rate effects, we also tried to
estimate cell survival after irradiation with 3 Gy and compared the model estimation with the
experimental data reported previously by McGarry et al.21 Upper panels in Fig. S8 shows the temporal
characteristics of dose delivery of clinical practices: (A) is accumulated dose delivered to cell
population (which corresponds to the in-field dose, DIF), (B) is the dose deposited at sub-time interval


                                                     8
of T (differential dose Dn in the model). Considering the dose delivery in Fig. S8B, we estimated the
normalized cell survival after irradiation with 3 Gy following 3D CRT, VMAT (single- and dual-arc)
and IMRT (5 and 9-fields) based on the present IMK model. It is noted that the parameters for
modulated field (MF) case were used to estimate the cell survival under clinical regimens whilst those
for uniform field (UF) case were used for uniform field at constant dose-rate. These parameters are
listed in Table 1 in the main paper.




  Figure S8. Comparisons between the model estimation and experimental data for the case of
  clinical dose delivery. A illustrates accumulated dose delivered to cell population. B shows the
  dose deposited at the interval of T (differential dose Dn in the model). C and D are the comparisons
  between the model estimation and experimental data of AGO1522 and DU145 cells reported by
  McGarry et al21. The error bar represents the 68.2 % confidence interval (CI) of cell survival
  calculated by MCMC simulation.


   Even in case of clinical applications to radiotherapy such as 3DCRT, VMAT and IMRT, the cell
survival estimated by the present model considering lower constant rate of SLDR and reduced
quadratic-term (0) in AGO1522 exhibits the similar tendency as reported by McGarry et al.20 This
comparison means that there is less cell recovery of normal healthy cells (AGO1522) for the cases of
clinical dose delivery. In contrast, the model prediction and the experimental data for the case of
uniform dose-rate irradiation show a significant recovery of cell survival as dose-delivery time is


                                                  9
protracted. However, the irradiation time to deliver 3 Gy to cells is very short, so further experiments
are necessary for check whether or not significance of dose-rate effects is reduced under modulated
radiation fields by using high dose.


VII. Cell-Cycle Study with AG Treatment for Modulated Radiation Field
   To discuss the reason why the surviving fraction of cells in-field under half-field exposure is
higher than that under the uniform-field exposure, we performed flow-cytometric analysis for
cell-cycle studies. Here, we show the additional in vitro experiments on cell-cycle dynamics in the
presence of 100 M AG for checking whether the NO contributes to protective effects or not16-19
because the NO-mediated bystander effect can be trigger to cause radio-resistance.20 As the same
manner as the main paper, we focused on the four timing, i.e., 0 h, 6 h, 24 h and 72 h after irradiation.




  Figure S9. Cell-cycle kinetics after the exposure in the presence of 100 M AG: (A) is the
  measured cell-cycle dynamics after full- or half-field exposure in AGO1522 cells, (B) is those in
  DU145 cells. * and ** mean 5% and 1% significant differences from previous cell-cycle fraction
  (i.e., 0 h and 6 h, 6 h and 24 h, 24 h and 72 h) as the same manner as the main paper. From these
  results, the inhibitor of NO does not seem to function for deleting the constant G1 fraction until 6h
  after irradiation.


  Figure S9 show the cell-cycle dynamics (change in fractions of cells in G1, S and G2/M phases) after
irradiation in the presence of 100M AG, where (A) and (B) are the AGO1522 cells and the DU145
cells, respectively. As shown in Figs. S9A and S9B, the inhibitor of NO does not seem to function for


                                                   10
deleting the constant G1 fraction until 6h after irradiation. Considering these, the NO might not be the
dominant factor to lead to lower radio-sensitivity under half-field exposure in comparison with
uniform-field (see Fig. 3 in the main paper). This interpretation is also supported by the results of cell
survival shown in Fig. S6, in which the experimental data and the model prediction show the increased
cell survival in the presence of the AG. To clarify the underlying mechanisms to lead to
radio-resistance (the reduced DNA damage yield under half-field exposure in the main paper), further
investigation is necessary.


Conflict of Interest
The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.


Author Contributions
Y. Matsuya, SJ. McMahon and KM. Prise designed the study, Y. Matsuya, M. Ghita performed
experiments, Y. Matsuya developed model and calculated cell survival, Y. Matsuya, Y. Yoshii, T.
Sato and H. Date calculated dose-mean lineal energy by Monte Carlo codes for transporting the
radiation particles, Y. Matsuya and SJ. McMahon wrote the manuscript, KM. Prise supervised the
study. All authors reviewed the manuscript.


V. References
 1. Sato, T., Iwamoto, Y., Hashimoto, S., Ogawa, T., Furuta, T., Abe, S., Kai, T., Tsai, P.E., Matsuda,
     N., Iwase, H., Shigyo, N., Sihver, L., Niita, K. Features of Particle and Heavy Ion Transport code
     System (PHITS) version 3.02. J. Nucl. Sci. Technol.1881-1248 Online (2018).
 2. Date, H., Sutherland, K.L., Hasegawa, H., Shimozuma, M. Ionization and excitation collision
     processes of electrons in liquid water. Nucl. Instr. Meth. B. 265(2): 515-520 (2007).
 3. Okamoto, H., Kanai, T., Kase, Y., Matsumoto, Y., Furusawa, Y. et al. Relation between lineal energy
     distribution and relative biological effectiveness for photon beams according to the microdosimetric
     kinetic model. J. Radiat. Res., 52(1): 75-81 (2011).
 4. Kawrakow, I., Walters, B.R.B. Efficient photon beam dose calculation using DOSXYZnrc with
     BEAMnrc. Med. Phys. 33: 3046–3056 (2006).
 5. ICRU. Microdosimetry. Report 36. International Commission on Radiation Units and Measurements.
     Bethesda: MD, (1983).
 6. Matsuya, Y., Kimura, T., Date, H. Markov chain Monte Carlo analysis for the selection of a
     cell-killing model under high-dose-rate irradiation. Med. Phys. 44(10): 5522-5532 (2017).
 7. Chib, S. and Greenberg, E. Understanding the Metropolis-Hastings Algorithm. Amer. Statist. 49,
     327–335 (1995).
 8. Gelfand AE and Smith AFM. Sampling-based approaches to calculating marginal density. J. Amer.
     Statist. Assoc. 85, 398–409 (1990).
 9. Gelman, A., Carlin, J.B., Stern, H.S. and Rubin, D.B. Model Checking and Improvement. In:
     Gelman A, Carlin JB, Stern HS and Rubin DB. Bayesian data analysis (vol.2) Boca Raton, FL, USA:
     Chapman & Hall/CRC; 283–310 (2014).
 10. Iyer, R., Lehnert, B.E. Factors underlying the cell growth-related bystander responses to alpha
     particles. Cancer Res. 60: 1290-1298 (2000).
 11. Matsuya, Y., Sasaki, K., Yoshii, Y., Okuyama, G., Date, H. Integrated Modelling of Cell Responses
     after irradiation for DNA-Targeted Effects and Non-Targeted Effects. Sci. Rep. 8: 4849 (2018).
 12. Matsuya, Y., McMahon, S.J., Tsutsumi, K., Sasaki, K., Okuyama, G., Yoshii, Y., Mori, R., Oikawa,
     J., Kevin, M.P., Date, H. Investigation of dose-rate effects and cell-cycle distribution under
     protracted exposure to ionizing radiation for various dose-rates. Sci. Rep. 8:8287 (2018).

                                                    11
13. Butterworth, K.T., McGarry, C.K., Trainor, C., McMahon, S.J., O’Sullivan, J.M., Schettino, G.,
    Hounsell, A.R., Prise, K.M. Dose, dose-rate and field size effects on cell survival following exposure
    to non-uniform radiation fields. Phys. Med. Biol. 57: 3197-3206 (2012).
14. Koizumi, S., Fujishita, K., Inoue, K., Shigemoto-Mogami, Y., Tsuda, M., & Inoue, K. Ca2 waves in
    keratinocytes are transmitted to sensory neurons: the involvement of extracellular ATP and P2Y2
    receptor activation. Biochem. J. 380, 329–338 (2004).
15. Shuryak, I., Sachs, R.K., & Brenner, D.J. Biophysical Models of Radiation Bystander Effects: 1.
    Spatial Effects in Three-Dimensional Tissues. Radiat. Res. 168: 741-749 (2007).
16. Kase, Y., Kanai, T., Matsumoto, Y., Furusawa, Y., Okamoto, H., Asaba, T., Sakama, M., Shinoda, H.
    Microdosimetric Measurement and Estimation of Human Cell Survival for Heavy-Ion Beams.
    Radiat. Res. 166: 629-638 (2006).
17. Widela, M., Przybyszewskib, W.M., Cieslar-Pobudaa, A., Saenkoc, Y.V., Rzeszowska-Wolny, J.
    Bystander normal human fibroblasts reduce damage response in radiation targeted cancer cells
    through intercellular ROS level modulation. Mutat. Res. 731: 117–124 (2012).
18. Lam, RKK., Fung, YK., Han, W., Yu, KN. Rescue Effects: Irradiated Cells Helped by Unirradiated
    Bystander Cells. Int. J. Mol. Sci., 16(2): 2591-2609 (2015).
19. Chen, S., Zhao, Y., Han, W., Chiu, SK., Zhu, L., Wu, L., Yu, KN. Rescue effects in radiobiology:
    Unirradiated bystander cells assist irradiated cells through intercellular signal feedback. Mutat. Res.,
    706(1-2): 59-64 (2011).
20. Matsumoto, H., Hayashi, S., Hatashita, M., Ohnishi, K., Shioura, H., Ohtsubo, T., Kitai, R., Ohnishi,
    T., Kano, E. Induction of Radioresistance by a Nitric Oxide-Mediated Bystander Effect. Radiat. Res.,
    155: 387-396 (2011).
21. McGarry C.K. Butterworth K.T. Trai or C. O’Su iva J.M. rise K.M., Hounsell, A.R.
    Temporal characterization and in vitro comparison of cell survival following the delivery of
    3Dconformal, intensity-modulated radiation therapy (IMRT) and volumetric modulated arc therapy
    (VMAT). Phys. Med. Biol. 56: 2445-2457 (2011).




                                                   12
