                                                  A multiscale radiation biophysical stochastic model describing
                                                  the cell survival response at ultra-high dose rate

                                                                      Marco Battestini1,2 , Marta Missiaggia2,3 , Sara Bolzoni1,2 , Francesco G.
                                                                      Cordoni2,4,a,∗ and Emanuele Scifoni2,a


                                                                      Abstract. Ultra-high dose-rate (UHDR) radiotherapy, characterized by an extremely high radiation




arXiv:2412.16322v1 [physics.bio-ph] 20 Dec 2024
                                                                      delivery rate, represents one of the most recent and promising frontier in radiotherapy. UHDR
                                                                      radiotherapy, addressed in the field as FLASH radiotherapy, is a disruptive treatment modality with
                                                                      several benefits, including significantly shorter treatment times, unchanged effectiveness in treating
                                                                      tumors, and clear reductions in side effects on normal tissues. While the benefits of UHDR irradiation
                                                                      have been well highlighted experimentally, the biological mechanism underlying the FLASH effect
                                                                      is still unclear and highly debated. Nonetheless, to effectively use UHDR radiotherapy in clinics,
                                                                      understanding the driving biological mechanism is paramount. Since the concurrent involvement of
                                                                      multiple scales of radiation damage has been suggested, we developed the MultiScale Generalized
                                                                      Stochastic Microdosimetric Model (MS-GSM2 ), a multi-stage extension of the GSM2, which is a
                                                                      probabilistic model describing the time evolution of the DNA damage in an irradiated cell nucleus. The
                                                                      MS-GSM2 can investigate several chemical species combined effects, DNA damage formation, and time
                                                                      evolution. We demonstrate that the MS-GSM2 can predict various in-vitro UHDR experimental results
                                                                      across various oxygenation levels, radiation types, and energies. The MS-GSM2 can accurately describe
                                                                      the empirical trend of dose and dose rate-dependent cell sensitivity over a wide range, consistently
                                                                      describing multiple aspects of the FLASH effect and reproducing the main evidence from the in-vitro
                                                                      experimental data. Our model also proposes a consistent explanation for the differential outcomes
                                                                      observed in normal tissues and tumors, in-vivo and in-vitro.




                                                  1. Introduction

                                                       A current frontier in the treatment of cancer is undoubtely the so-called FLASH radiotherapy, a
                                                  revolutionary radiation therapy technique based on the ultra-high dose rate (UHDR) irradiation, i.e., a
                                                  faster beam delivery (total irradiation time < 100 ms and a mean dose rate of the total irradiation >
                                                  40 Gy/s for a single high dose, usually higher than 10 Gy) compared to conventional (Conv) irradiation
                                                  (dose rate of 0.03 - 0.1 Gy/s) [Vozenin et al., 2022, Limoli and Vozenin, 2023]. The peculiarity of this
                                                  novel approach is that it allows to significantly reduce the side effects to healthy tissues [Vozenin et al.,
                                                  2019, Montay-Gruel et al., 2017, Montay-Gruel et al., 2019, Loo et al., 2017], with the same tumor efficacy
                                                  [Favaudon et al., 2014]. This phenomenon is known as the FLASH effect, and it has been showed on
                                                  in-vitro cells [Adrian et al., 2020, Tessonnier et al., 2021, Tinganelli et al., 2022a], on animals [Vozenin
                                                  et al., 2019, Montay-Gruel et al., 2017, Montay-Gruel et al., 2019, Loo et al., 2017, Montay-Gruel et al.,
                                                  2021, Diffenderfer et al., 2020, Cunningham et al., 2021, Tinganelli et al., 2022b, Sørensen et al., 2022]
                                                  and also on humans [Bourhis et al., 2019]. From a clinical point of view [Daugherty et al., 2023], FLASH
                                                  radiotherapy allows to improve the quality of radiotherapy treatment significantly.
                                                       Despite clear experimental evidence supporting the FLASH effect, highlighting the benefits of
                                                  the UHDR irradiations, the biological mechanism underlying the FLASH effect is still unclear and
                                                  highly debated [Limoli and Vozenin, 2023]. In recent years, several tentative hypotheses [Spitz et al.,
                                                  2019, Labarbe et al., 2020, Wardman, 2020, Zhou, 2020, Pratx and Kapp, 2020, Ramos-Méndez et al.,
                                                  2020, Zakaria et al., 2020, Abolfath et al., 2020, Petersson et al., 2020] have been proposed to explain
                                                  the FLASH effect [Friedl et al., 2022], many of which have been considered implausible following further
                                                  experimental evidence, e.g. [Pratx and Kapp, 2020, Ramos-Méndez et al., 2020]. None have yet been
                                                  † 1 Department of Physics, via Sommarive 14, 38123, Trento, Italy
                                                  † 2 Trento Institute for Fundamental Physics and Application (TIFPA), via Sommarive 15, 38123, Trento, Italy
                                                  † 3 Department of Radiation Oncology, University of Miami Miller School of Medicine, 33136, Miami FL, USA
                                                  † 4 Department of Civil, Environmental and Mechanical Engineering, via Mesiano 77, 38123, Trento, Italy
                                                  † a equal contribution
                                                  † ∗ corresponding author
                                                  † E-mail     addresses:        marco.battestini@unitn.it,     marta.missiaggia@miami.edu,      sara.bolzoni@studenti.unitn.it,
                                                  francesco.cordoni@unitn.it, emanuele.scifoni@tifpa.infn.it
                                                                                                             2




                     Figure 1: Schematic representation of the MS-GSM2 workflow.


able to explain it fully.
However, what has emerged from all these efforts is that multiple scales of radiation damage action should
be— involved [Weber et al., 2022a]. The crucial role of chemical environment and of the redox system
has been underlined [Labarbe et al., 2020, Weber et al., 2022a, Wardman, 2020, Favaudon et al., 2022].
      Over the last years, a plethora of mechanistic models have been proposed and developed [Labarbe
et al., 2020, Abolfath et al., 2020, Liew et al., 2021, Petersson et al., 2020, Abolfath et al., 2023, Zhu
et al., 2021, Spitz et al., 2019, Hu et al., 2021, Alanazi et al., 2020, Zakaria et al., 2020, Pratx and Kapp,
2020]. Most such models have been based on the hypothesis of a single driving mechanism and they
can only partially reproduce the experimental data, suggesting some limits in their capability to explain
and predict the mechanism of the effect of the FLASH effect. Instead,We hypothesize that the FLASH
biological effect is due to a interplay of various spatio-temporal scales, as suggested by [Weber et al.,
2022a].
      In this context, we develop the MultiScale Generalized Stochastic Microdosimetric Model (MS-
GSM2 ), a multi-stage extension of the Generalized Stochastic Microdosimetric Model (GSM2 ) [Cordoni
et al., 2021, Cordoni et al., 2022b, Cordoni et al., 2022a, Cordoni, 2023b, Missiaggia et al., 2024, Battestini
et al., 2023]. The GSM2 is a stochastic Markov model that describes the formation and repair of
radiation-induced DNA damages in a cell nucleus. The GSM2 can reproduce in-vitro cell survival data
for conventional irradiation for different particles [Missiaggia et al., 2024, Cartechini et al., 2024]. This
work aims to establish a general mathematical framework seamlessly integrating various stochastic spatial
and temporal scales to study the combined effects of multiple chemical species and the formation and
progression of DNA damage within the UHDR regime. These scales range from the nearly instantaneous
ionization of biological tissue to the rapid chemical environment contributing to DNA damage formation
and, ultimately, to the slow biological repair processes determining a cell’s fate. The hypothesis that
UHDR modifies the chemical environment to induce a reduction of indirect damage yield, with a
consequent tissue sparing. The reduction of DNA damage is supported by experimental evidence,
[Tessonnier et al., 2021, Cooper et al., 2022, Wanstall et al., 2024]. In this work, we fulfill the development
and validation of MS-GSM2 [Battestini et al., 2023]. We first include the reduction of radiation-induced
DNA damage owing to lower oxygen concentration, a well-documented effect in radiobiologywith a strong
interplay with the radiation quality of the beam [Scifoni et al., 2013]. Unlike existing models, the MS-
GSM2 explicitly incorporates oxygen concentration through a term in the system of differential equations
that govern its time-dependent evolution influenced by environmental reactions. Further, we significantly
restructure and enhance the chemical reaction network previously considered in [Labarbe et al., 2020]. The
water radiolysis reactions, which occur during the heterogeneous chemical stage, thus at faster time scales
than those of organic chemical species, which are the main species of interest in the present framework, are
now included through a parametrization process using the Monte Carlo toolkit TRAX-CHEM [Boscolo
et al., 2018]. Consequently, we derive a chemical network of ten reactions, represented by five ordinary
differential equations (ODEs) that describe the chemical environment. The influence of radiation is
                                                                                                          3

integrated into the chemical network, characterized by stochastic random arrival times. Ultimately, the
chemical environment is modeled using piecewise deterministic ODEs with random jumps in amplitude
at random intervals. This captures the stochastic nature of radiation energy deposition in time and space.
This chemical reaction network is then coupled to the Markov model as outlined by GSM2 , incorporating
DNA damage repair mechanisms, culminating in a comprehensive multi-scale stochastic mathematical
model.
     We develop a versatile mathematical model capable of describing the intricate mechanisms underlying
the FLASH effect while maintaining flexibility for predictive modeling, being, ultimately, its purpose
dedicated to replicate experimental outcomes. We implement such a model by an efficient coupling of
Stochastic Simulation Algorithm (SSA) to describe the radiation random arrival times and the Markov
model with the solution of the ODE. This approach provides accurate predictions and ensures swift
implementation of a complex system. We successfully replicate the main in-vitro cell-survival UHDR
experimental data from the main studies available in literature [Adrian et al., 2020, Tessonnier et al.,
2021, Tinganelli et al., 2022a], encompassing a diverse spectrum of particle types, energies,delivered doses
and physiological conditions. The accuracy of our predictions across this extensive range of physical,
chemical, and biological conditions provides compelling evidence supporting that the MS-GSM2 grasps
all the physics behind the potential mechanism underlying the FLASH effect. Supported by the in-silico
prediction of the MS-GSM2 , we eventually propose that the different redox environment between tumor
and healthy tissue is at the origin of the differential effect seen on the two different tissues.

Results

The model
     The GSM2 [Cordoni et al., 2021, Cordoni et al., 2022b] is a Markov model that generalizes
the standard Poisson statistics for the number of radiation-induced DNA damages [Cordoni et al.,
2022a, Cordoni, 2023a]. Specifically, the GSM2 encompasses the randomness of radiation energy
deposition, DNA damage formation, and the temporal repair of these damages within a singular
framework. The GSM2 is considerably extended in the present work to include the effect of UHDR
into the model via a suitable chemical reaction network, developing a multi-stage tool, the MS-GSM2 .
In the following paragraphs, we outline the mathematical framework of MS-GSM2 , dividing the model’s
components into stages, from the rapid physical stage to the slow biological stage. The basic idea of the
model is also schematized in Figure 1.

The physical stage We describe a cell nucleus using a cylinder of radius RN = 8 µm (xy-plane) and length
2RN (z-direction), divided into Nd = 52 cubic domains. The absorbed dose of every energy deposition
event z is distributed on the Nd domains of the xy plane of the cell nucleus, according to the Amorphous
Track (AT) model described in [Scholz and Kraft, 1996]. The AT model hypothesizes that the energy
deposition by a particle has cylindrical symmetry, characterized by a uniform energy distribution over a
circle with radius Rc centered on the impact point, and decreases proportionally to r−2 , where r is the
distance from the impact point. Beyond a certain distance Rp , no energy is deposited, i.e.
                                                              
                                      12           LET
                                        πRc  ρ(1+2 ln(Rp /Rc )) r ≤ Rc ,
                              D(r) =                                                                 (1)
                                         1         LET
                                      2
                                        πr   ρ(1+2 ln(Rp /Rc ))   r ∈ [Rc , Rp ] ,

where LET is the linear energy transfer, which characterizes the radiation quality, and ρ is the water
density. In this study, Rp is defined as the radius at which 80% of the dose is deposited by the track,
referred to as R80 [Weber et al., 2022a, Battestini et al., 2023]. This approximation neglects the residual
extension of the dose until the maximum distance allowed to the secondary electrons propagation, which is
spread along a broader circular crown. The impact position of the primary particles is sampled randomly
from a uniform distribution on a circle of radius RN + R80 on the xy-plane. The energy deposited in each
domain is then calculated, demonstrating the stochastic nature of energy deposition, as different impact
points result in varying amounts of energy being deposited in the cell nucleus and, consequently, in each
domain.
     All of the energy deposition events up to the end of the irradiation, i.e., Tirr = D/Ḋ, where D is
the imparted macroscopic dose, and Ḋ is the mean dose rate, are calculated obtaining the total number
of simulated particles. The elapsed time τ between two consecutive deposition events is sampled from
an exponential distribution, which depends on the dose rate and the mean energy deposited in a single
event.
                                                                                                                             4

     Lastly, in this work, we generalize the dose-delivery simulation to describe any time structure. In
particular, in the case of ions, we consider a unique pulse described by a macroscopic dose prescription
D and an overall mean dose rate Ḋ, and we simulate the discrete energy deposition events of this pulse,
according to the previous description. On the contrary, for electrons, according to the experimental
dose delivery time structure, we simulate irradiation characterized by a sequence of an integer number
of pulses, identified by a dose-per-pulse and a pulse time, interspersed with pauses, defined by a pulse
repetition frequency. As before, we sample the energy deposition events for each pulse.

The chemical stage We consider a chemical reaction network of nine reactions described by five ODEs.
The derived system is a severe optimization of the one proposed in [Labarbe et al., 2020], on the one
hand by simplifying some equations, cutting away some negligible reactions, and on the other hand by
adjusting some reaction constants, among all of those listed in Sections S.1 and S.2 of [Labarbe et al.,
2020].
     In particular, in [Labarbe et al., 2020], the reactions involving only chemical species derived from the
                                                 •−
water radiolysis, such as e−         •   •
                             aq , OH , H , H2 , O2 , have much lower rates than both the reactions between
these species with organic molecules, and those between organic species alone. Indeed, it is possible
to neglect these types of reactions, thus separating the two timescales: a faster one which we assume
to be instantaneous, i.e., the early heterogeneous stage of water radiolysis that is incorporated through
the production terms as described by G-values of chemical species in the system of equations, i.e., the
number of chemical species produced per 100 eV of energy absorbed by the medium, and that of the
reactions involving the various organic chemical species, such as RH, R• , ROO• , vitamin E, thiols and
their derivatives, described explicitly by the reaction rates. It is worth stressing that the latter species
is the one which we directly link to the radiation-induced damage formation. In this way, we obtain, for
each domain d = 1, . . . , 52, the following system
                                                                                                 [cat]
                = k1 · [R• ]d (t) · [O2 ]d (t) + k2 · [ROO• ]d (t) · [ROO• ]d (t) + k3 · km +[H
d


          d
  dt [O2 ] (t)                                                                                           d
                                                                                                   2 O2 ] (t)
                                                                                                              · [H2 O2 ]d (t) ,
 d    d                                                     [cat]
  dt CH2 O2 (t) = k4 · [F e2+ ] · [H2 O2 ]d (t) − 2k3 · km +[H2 O2 ]d (t) · [H2 O2 ]d (t) + GH2 O2 ρż d ,





                = −k5 · [RH] · [OH• ]d (t) + k4 · [F e2+ ] · [H2 O2 ]d (t) − k6 · [XSH] · [OH• ]d (t) + GOH• ρż d ,
d d
  dt COH• (t)
        • d



  d
  dt [R ] (t)   = k5 · [RH] · [OH• ]d (t) − k1 · [R• ]d (t) · [O2 ]d (t) − k7 · [XSH] · [R• ]d (t)+
                −2k8 · [R• ]d (t) · [R• ]d (t) + GR• ρż d ,





d          • d           • d            d                            • d                    • d                • d
  dt [ROO ] (t) = k1 · [R ] (t) · [O2 ] (t) − k9 · [XSH] · [ROO ] (t) − 2k2 · [ROO ] (t) · [ROO ] (t) ,
                                                                                                                          (2)
                          d                               d
                         CH O (t)                        COH• (t)
where [H2 O2 ]d (t) =      2 2
                           KH O      and [OH• ]d (t) =        KOH •     , that describe the acid-base equilibria, in analogy
                        1+    2 2                        1+
                            [H + ]                             [H + ]

to [Labarbe et al., 2020], ρ is the water density, while Gξ are the G-values, according to TRAX-CHEM
simulations [Boscolo et al., 2018, Boscolo et al., 2020] , computed at 1 µs. Overall, we have a system of
260 ODEs.
     As previously mentioned, we update the values of some reaction constants within the ranges
we found in the literature to describe the experiments better, as shown in the next section. In
particular, in this work, we consider k1 = 108 (mol/l)−1 · s−1 (typical range of [106 , 1010 ](mol/l)−1 · s−1
[Labarbe et al., 2020, Spitz et al., 2019, Neta et al., 1990, Epp et al., 1976, Michael et al., 1986]),
k2 = 105 (mol/l)−1 · s−1 (typical range of [103 , 105 ](mol/l)−1 · s−1 [Labarbe et al., 2020, Riahi et al.,
2010]), and k9 = 102 (mol/l)−1 · s−1 [Spitz et al., 2019, Wardman, 2020]. With this last modification, we
include the scavenging role of GSH to take into account the elimination of ROO• from the environment,
which had been partially neglected in [Labarbe et al., 2020], according to [Wardman, 2020, Tan et al.,
2023]. Additionally, the terms ż represent the local energy deposition within the domain, as outlined in
the preceding section. Specifically, the terms ż are characterized by random impulses in both time and
magnitude, which depict the stochastic nature of the time delivery structure.
     Table S1 of the SI Appendix reports the reaction rate constants’ values and the chemical species’
initial concentrations considered in this work.

The bio-chemical stage In the biochemical stage, the deposition of radiation energy and the chemical
environment are interconnected with the yield of biological damage.
     The peculiarity of the GSM2 is that it overcomes the usual assumptions of a Poissonian distribution
of the number of radiation-induced DNA damage, which limits the possible predictions of biological
endpoints, as demonstrated in [Missiaggia et al., 2024]. The GSM2 assumes the possibility of generation
                                                                                                                5

of two types of DNA damage, the lethal lesion Y , i.e., irreparable damage, leading to cell inactivation,
and sub-lethal lesion X, i.e., repairable damage, where Y and X are two N−valued random variables.
     A protracted dose-rate term d˙ modulates the energy deposition events and subsequent lesion creation
[Cordoni et al., 2021]. The next treatment made several generalizations regarding the creation of DNA
damage. The average damage yield consequent to an energy deposition z is calculated as

                                                           DSB(LET)
                                    κ (LET, [O2 ]) z =                    z.                                  (3)
                                                         OER (LET, [O2 ])

Above, DSB(LET) is the analytical formula representing the average yield of damage obtained via
track-structure simulations in [Kundrát et al., 2020], whereas OER (LET, [O2 ]) represents the Oxygen
Enhancement Ratio (OER), i.e., the ratio of doses giving the same biological effect in the presence of
a given concentration of oxygen [O2 ] as compared to the full oxygenation (normoxia), characterizes a
well-documented experimental phenomenon in radiation biophysics where damage fixation increases at
higher oxygen concentrations, leading to enhanced radiation lethality. The OER is described in [Scifoni
et al., 2013, Epp et al., 1972] as
                                                                         γ
                                                            LET ·M +LET
                                                     KO2 · KKLET +LET
                                                                      γ + [O2 ]
                                OER (LET, [O2 ]) =                                ,                           (4)
                                                             KO2 + [O2 ]

where M represents the maximum effect, KO2 is the flex point for [O2 ], as outlined in [Epp et al., 1972],
KLET denotes the flex point for LET, that is, the average energy deposited per unit path length, which
characterizes the radiation quality of the ionizing particle, and γ is an additional fitted parameter, as
emphasized in [Scifoni et al., 2013]. To consider the impact of the chemical environment, the damage
yield is divided into a direct contribution, which describes the lesions formed immediately from energy
deposition regardless of the chemical environment, and an indirect contribution resulting from the action of
radicals and other molecular species. We assume that following an energy deposition event z, on average,
a proportion (1 − q)κ (LET, [O2 ]) yield a direct damage. In contrast, the remaining qκ (LET, [O2 ]) will
yield and indirect damage. These proportions are again calculated using the formulas given in [Kundrát
et al., 2020]. Being the direct damage independent of the chemical environment, we describe the number
of induced lesions with a Poisson random variable of average (1 − q)κ (LET, [O2 ]) z. Regarding indirect
damages, we assume that the number of such damages depends on the chemical environment and the
irradiation pattern. We assume that the concentration of peroxyl radical [ROO• ] is directly linked to
the number of indirect damage
                          Rt       created, so we describe this process with a Poisson random variable of
average qκ (LET, [O2 ]) ϱ 0 [ROO¯ • ](s) ds. This quantity is normalized in such a way to obtain the same
average of damage yield computed with track-structure simulations in [Kundrát et al., 2020] at standard
conditions, i.e., conventional irradiation and 21 % O2 . At the same time, it decreases as the oxygenation
level decreases and the dose rate increases. Additional information about this can be found in the SI
Appendix.
     Overall, the damage yield creation can be summarized by the following network
                                (
                             d˙   X + ZX;dir     with probability 1 − q ∈ [0, 1] ,
                          X− →                                                     .                     (5)
                                  X + ZX;indir with probability q ∈ [0, 1] ,

where ZX;dir and ZX;indir are two Poisson random variables, with average, respectively, κ (LET, [O2 ]) z
                    Rt
                          ¯ • ](s) ds. These two processes will be described via two unitary Poisson jump
and κ (LET, [O2 ]) ϱ 0 [ROO
            (c,d)       (c,d)
processes Pdir and Pindir , respectively. A completely analogous argument has been used to form lethal
lesions Y , with the function κ substituting by λ = 10−3 κ.
     The formulation described above offers a comprehensive overview of the process of radiation-induced
damage formation, distinguishing between direct and indirect lesions. It introduces for the first time
an explicit dependency on the chemical environment through the OER formulation (4) and explicitly
incorporates radicals’ impact on damage yield. Consequently, as the pattern of radiation energy deposition
significantly influences this factor, the formulation enables us to depict the dual dependency of damage
yield on oxygenation and the presence of organic radicals, demonstrating a sparing effect at progressively
higher dose rates, as shown experimentally by [Cooper et al., 2022, Wanstall et al., 2024].

The biological stage It is possible to describe the state of the system at time t considering two random
variables (Y (t), X(t)), i.e., the number of lethal and sub-lethal lesions at time t, respectively. In particular,
                                                                                                                          6

a sub-lethal lesion can undergo three different pathways,
                                            a             r                 b
                                        X−
                                         →Y ,         X−
                                                       → ∅,       X +X −
                                                                       →Y ,                                             (6)

where a is the rate of the evolution of a sub-lethal lesion to a lethal one, b describes the rate of pairwise
interaction of two sub-lethal lesions, while r represents the repair rate, with ∅ the ensemble of healthy
cells. More details about the mathematical framework of this model can be found in [Cordoni et al.,
                                                                                                 (c,d)
2021, Cordoni et al., 2022b]. These processes are described by Ph , with h ∈ {a, b, r}, that are
independent unitary Poisson jump-processes acting on a single domain, [Weinan et al., 2019].
      In the end, we obtained the following system of equations for the MS-GSM2 for each domain
d = 1, . . . , Nd ,
                                                                                                                  
                                 (c,d) R t                                   (c,d) R t
               
               
                Y (c,d) (t) = Pa           0 
                                               aX (c,d) (s)ds + Pb                   0
                                                                                       bX (c,d) (s)(X (c,d) (s) − 1)ds +
                                                                                      R                    
                               (c,d) (c)            ˙ t + Z (c,d) P(c,d)                   t      ¯ • ](s) ds ,
               
               
               
                            +Z        P
                                Y ;dir Y ;dir     ( d               Y ;indir Y ;indir    ϱ 0
                                                                                              [ ROO
                                                                                                      
               X (c,d) (t) = −P(c,d) R t aX (c,d) (s)ds − P(c,d) R t rX (c,d) (s)ds +
               
                                    a                                          r
                                          0                                            0                             (7)
                                  (c,d) R t        (c,d)             (c,d)                       (c,d) (c)      ˙t +
               
               
               
                            −2P  b          0
                                                bX        (s)(X            (s)  −  1)ds    +  Z  X;dir PX;dir  d
                                                      R                          
                               (c,d)       (c,d)              t      ¯   • ](s) ds ,
               
               
               
                            +Z           P
                                X;indir X;indir          ϱ    0
                                                                 [ ROO
               
               d d                           
                                        d                      d
                  dt ξ (t)   = fξ d   ξ   (t)   + G   ξ d ρ ż    ,

where the last equation represents the random ODE system (2) describing the chemical environment.
The first two equations in (7) is a pathwise description in terms of jump-type Stochastic Differential
Equations (SDE) of the processes (6) and (5); a similar pathwise formulation of the GSM2 , with no
explicit chemical environment formulation, has also been derived in [Cordoni, 2023b], we refer to [Weinan
et al., 2019, Chapter 13].
     We emphasize that the enhancements in this work render the MS-GSM2 highly flexible and
comprehensive, enabling the examination of various scenarios: physically, it accommodates any radiation
dose-delivery complex time structure, type, and energy without simplification on the dose rate structures
as done in all the existing mechanistic models where an average macroscopic dose rate is mostly assumed;
chemically, it considers all chemical and environmental conditions, such as oxygenation and scavenger
concentrations; biologically, it describes multiple effects, from well-established ones like the oxygen effect
on DNA damage fixation during conventional irradiation, to widely debated ones like the sparing effect
seen at UHDR regimes across various cell lines. The final biological endpoint predicted is the cell survival
probability, defined as                                                    
                                  P lim Y (c,1) (t), . . . , Y (c,Nd ) (t) = 0 ,                           (8)
                                         t→∞

allowing a strict validation as in the following.

Validation of the MS-GSM2 on in-vitro UHDR experimental data
     To stress MS-GSM2 validity and predictive power, the model predictions have been compared with
all available experimental data at UHDR for different oxygenation. Such experimental data are of
broadly different types, using all the parameters (oxygenation, time structure, doses, radiation quality,
etc., as reported in the original publications Figure 2a shows the comparison between the experimental
cell survival fractions of prostate cancer cell line DU145 [Adrian et al., 2020] (in blue) and MS-GSM2
prediction (in black). The horizontal axis lists different conditions, not to scale, reporting the different
levels of oxygenation (1.6%, 2.7%, 4.4%, 8.3%, 20.0% O2 ) as indicated in the original publication, for
electron at 10 MeV in Conv (mean dose rate of 14 Gy/min) and UHDR (mean dose rate of 600 Gy/s)
irradiations of 18 Gy. In particular, the dose was delivered with an integer number of pulses, a pulse
time of 3.5 µs, and a pulse repetition frequency of 200 Hz in the case of Conv irradiation, while with an
integer number of pulses, a dose-per-pulse of 3 Gy, and a pulse repetition frequency of 200 Hz at UHDR
regime. The experimental irradiation structure has been incorporated within the MS-GSM2 framework.
As illustrated in Figure 2a, the MS-GSM2 encompasses the OER effect, evidenced by the elevated cell
survival fraction at reduced oxygen concentrations for both conventional and FLASH irradiation, as well
as the FLASH sparing effect distinguishing the conventional and UHDR regimes.
     Figure 2b reports the survival fractions of human lung epithelial cells A549 (experimental [Tessonnier
et al., 2021] results (in blue) plotted against MS-GSM2 prediction (in black)), at hypoxia and normoxia
conditions (1.0% and 21.0% O2 ), for Conv and UHDR irradiations of 8 Gy, in the case of helium ions
                                                                                                                                                                          7


                                                                10−2

                                                                                                                                       Experiment
                                                                                                                                       MS−GSM2




                                           Surviving fraction
                                                                10−3




                                                                10−4




                                                                10−5
                                                                   Conv 1.6% Conv 2.7% Conv 4.4% Conv 8.3% Conv 20%
                                                                        FLASH 1.6% FLASH 2.7% FLASH 4.4% FLASH 8.3% FLASH 20%


                                         (a) DU145 cell survival in the case of 10 MeV electrons irradiation,
                                         at 18 Gy for both Conv (14 Gy/min) and FLASH (600 Gy/s) dose
                                         rates, for different oxygenations (1.6%, 2.7%, 4.4%, 8.3%, 20% O2 ).

                         0.5
                                                                                  Experiment                                                             Experiment
                                                                                  MS−GSM2                                                                MS−GSM2




    Surviving fraction                                                                         Surviving fraction
                         0.4                                                                                        0.2

                         0.3

                                                                                                                    0.1
                         0.2

                         0.1
                                                                                                                    0.0
                               Conv 1%                                 Conv 21%                                           Conv 0.5%       Conv 4%      Conv 21%
                                         FLASH 1%                                 FLASH 21%                                      FLASH 0.5%     FLASH 4%      FLASH 21%


    (b) A549 cell survival in the case of 4.5 keV/µm (c) CHO-K1 cell survival in the case of 13 keV/µm
    helium ions irradiation, at 8 Gy for both Conv (0.12 carbon ions irradiation, at 7.5 Gy for both Conv
    Gy/s) and FLASH (205.13 Gy/s) dose rates, for (0.6 Gy/s) and FLASH (70 Gy/s) dose rates, for
    different oxygenations (1%, 21% O2 ).                different oxygenations (0.5%, 4%, 21% O2 ).

                                   Figure 2: Comparison of the MS-GSM2 results with experimental data.


impinging the cells at a LET of 4.5 keV/µm. In particular, the dose was delivered with a mean dose rate
of 0.12 Gy/s for Conv, with a mean dose rate of 205.13 Gy/s.
     Figure 2c shows the comparison of survival fractions of Chinese hamster ovary cells CHO-K1, between
the MS-GSM2 prediction (in black) and the experiment [Tinganelli et al., 2022a] (in blue), at different
oxygen concentrations (0.5%, 4.0%, 21.0% O2 ). Carbon ion irradiation has been performed for both Conv
(mean dose rate of 0.6 Gy/s) and UHDR (mean dose rate of 70 Gy/s) irradiations of 7.5 Gy, in the case
of carbon ions of 13 keV/µm.
     Figure 2 highlights how the MS-GSM2 can describe the trend of the experimental data at different
oxygenation levels in terms of oxygenation and sparing at different dose rates and for different radiation
quality.
     For each of these experiments, we calibrated the biological parameters of our model, i.e., a, b, and r,
on the experimental points at standard conditions, i.e., for conventional irradiation and normoxia, that
is 21% oxygenation. The MS-GSM2 has completely predicted all the other results. We discuss details
regarding the calibration procedure in the SI Appendix.

Translation to in-vivo: in-silico evidence on a new mechanism for the differential effect
      Figure 3 reports the combined action of oxygenation and antioxidant environment on the emergence
of the FLASH effect for electron irradiation. In particular, the color map distribution describes the
relative variation of the surviving probability for UHDR irradiation with respect to the conventional one,
i.e. (ln SConv − ln SF LASH )/ ln SConv , as a function of the environmental oxygen (in the x-axis) and the
                                                                                                             8




Figure 3: Perspective analysis of the impact of the chemical environment on the emergence of the FLASH
effect for electron irradiation. Relative change in cell survival between Conv and UHDR irradiation. Light
colors correspond to a high differential effect, while dark colors correspond to a low differential effect.
in-vitro, in-vivo - healthy tissue, and in-vivo - tumor regions are highlighted in white.


rate of antioxidants (in the y-axis), i.e., the product between the concentration of a chemical species and
the reaction constant. We obtained this by repeating the simulation of the irradiation with electrons
for several levels of antioxidant concentrations and at different oxygen conditions and considering the
same physical and biological parameters that we used for [Adrian et al., 2020]. In particular, light colors
correspond to a high differential effect between conventional and UHDR irradiation, while dark colors
correspond to a low differential effect.

Discussion

      Results reported in Section 1 show that MS-GSM2 can describe the empirical trend on a wide
range of dose and dose rate values, particle type, and energy, ranging from electrons to carbon ions
and environmental oxygen conditions, from severe hypoxia (0.5% O2 ) to normoxia (21% O2 ). This is
achievable due to the remarkable flexibility and comprehensiveness of the model, which simultaneously
encompasses various physical, chemical, and biological aspects across different spatial and temporal scales.
In particular, temporally, the MS-GSM2 can span from 10−6 to 100 s with the chemical stage and up to
105 s for the DNA damage evolution. Spatially, the MS-GSM2 can describe the physical and chemical
events that occur between 10−6 − 10−5 m, up to the macroscopic scale for biology. Everything that
happens below these spatial and temporal scales is, however, taken into account by the MS-GSM2 because
it is parameterized through a track-structure Monte Carlo approach, for example, to estimate the DNA
damage yield in standard conditions, or using an analytical approach, e.g., the amorphous track model for
the calculation of the spatial dose distribution. Extensions to include explicit descriptions beyond these
temporal and spatial scales are under investigation. However, as demonstrated for electrons, protons,
and carbon ions, [Baikalov et al., 2023, Thompson et al., 2023, Weber et al., 2022b], the early stage
recombination is supposed to play a minor role.
      As mentioned in the previous section, the GSM2 parameters have been consistently calibrated to
normoxic conditions during conventional irradiation; all other experimental data points are entirely
predicted. We want to underline the remarkable potential of the MS-GSM2 , which can predict the
sparing effect that occurs at FLASH regime, seen as the rise of the cell survival curves compared to
the conventional irradiation, for several levels of oxygenation, from 0.5% to 21% O2 , different radiation
qualities, i.e., electrons, helium, and carbon ions, and, finally, different dose levels, as shown in Figure 2.
Currently, there are no other mechanistic models capable of simultaneously incorporating all these effects
and, consequently, reproducing all the main in-vitro experimental data at UHDR regime, i.e., [Adrian
et al., 2020, Tessonnier et al., 2021, Tinganelli et al., 2022a].
      A key advantage of the MS-GSM2 is its ability to account explicitly for the actual temporal structure
                                                                                                                 9

of dose delivery. Optimizing the physical parameters for the clinical application of FLASH irradiation
presents significant challenges due to the various parameters affecting the radiation’s temporal structure,
such as micro- and macro-pulses, repetition frequency, and dose-per-pulse. Existing models, which
rely solely on the average approximation of the beam structure, may face a significant limitation due
to the current uncertainty regarding which parameters are most influential in the emergence of the
FLASH sparing effect. The MS-GSM2 can go beyond these parameterizations, encompassing in a unique
framework the actual temporal structure of the radiation, i.e., the one experienced by the cell. A clear
example of this is the fact that we can describe both the irradiation with electrons, which is characterized
by a series of pulses interspersed with pauses [Adrian et al., 2020], and the irradiation with ions, which
occurs with a single macro pulse [Tessonnier et al., 2021, Tinganelli et al., 2022a].
      A very interesting aspect arises from Figure 2a, namely the fact that the survival level at 1.6 % O2
for conventional irradiation is comparable with those at 2.7 % O2 for UHDR irradiation. This means
that the rise of the surviving fraction in the case of FLASH irradiation, due to the reduction of indirect
damage caused by the higher recombination of organic radicals, can have the same biological effect of a
reduction of oxygenation. Environmental oxygen appears to play a crucial role in the emergence of the
FLASH effect. As equation (2) indicates, oxygen is essential for producing organic radicals. However,
it is important to note that this effect is not directly related to oxygen depletion. In the initial years of
FLASH mechanistic investigations, the prevailing hypothesis was proposing a transient hypoxia induced
by oxygen depletion [Petersson et al., 2020]. Still, this hypothesis has been widely discredited by both
theoretical calculations [Boscolo et al., 2021] and experimental evidence [Jansen et al., 2021, Cao et al.,
2021].
      Another crucial point from Figure 2 is that the sparing effect, i.e., the increase in cell survival at
UHDR, is visible for every oxygenation level. In particular, the FLASH effect is also visible at 21% O2
condition, e.g., for electrons irradiation, as in Figure 2a or, in general, in [Adrian et al., 2020, Adrian et al.,
2021], but also in the case of carbon ions, as in Figure 2c. In contrast, in the case of in-vivo experiments,
the FLASH effect occurs only in hypoxia conditions, while it was not observed at physiologic conditions
(4-8% O2 ). In addition, unlike what happens in-vivo, in the case of in-vitro measurements, the sparing
effect occurs in both healthy and tumor cells. These two aspects highlight how, most likely, the FLASH
effect in-vivo is described by the action of at least two combined effects: a protective effect depending on
the dose rate, and another effect modulating its magnitude, depending on the redox environment. Indeed,
as already mentioned previously, we hypothesize that the sparing effect for UHDR irradiation, which is
also visible in-vitro, is due to the different recombination of organic radicals, which decreases the toxicity
of the cellular environment, and therefore, the action of indirect action of the radiation on the formation
of DNA damages, as recently suggested by an experiment on plasmid [Wanstall et al., 2024]. At the same
time, we speculate that the action of the redox environment, particularly the presence of antioxidants
such as thiols, is the basis for the differential effect between healthy and tumor tissue observed for in-
vivo experiments. This second mechanism, which may result in leveling out the magnitude of the DNA
damage reduction, is much more complex than the mechanism underlying the sparing effect, which occurs
on an intra-cellular level and results in a variation of the indirect DNA damage yield. This latter one
may involve a more macroscopic regulation of the redox environment in-vivo compared to in-vitro.
      Through the MS-GSM2 , we can detail what happens at the cellular level. To describe what happens
in-vivo, what should happen is that there should be no differences in normoxia between conventional and
UHDR irradiation and, at the same time, that there should be no sparing effect in the case of tumor
tissues. We hypothesize that the chemical environment, and in particular the redox environment, is
crucial to explain the FLASH effect at the in-vivo level. It is believed that there is a difference in the
cellular chemical environment between in-vitro and in-vivo, due to, for example, higher concentrations
of antioxidants or, more generally, to the different ability to remove toxic chemical species from the
cellular environment. From Figure 3, it is evident that in the in-vitro setting, the cellular environment
exists within a gradient region where the differential effect between conventional and UHDR irradiation
is observed. However, transitioning from in-vitro to in-vivo, particularly increasing the antioxidant
concentration, there are instances where a sparing effect is not consistently present. In particular, we can
identify the two regions for healthy and cancer tissues, where there is a gradient of the effect, or there is
no effect, respectively, also considering that [O2 ]tumor < [O2 ]healthy . Indeed, we can distinguish these two
areas, e.g., due to the different concentrations of glutathione (GSH) between normal tissue and tumor
[Michael P. Gamcsik and Colvin, 2012]. We also hypothesize that the gradient of the sparing effect of the
in-vitro region explains both the fact that the FLASH effect is observed with different magnitude for the
various cell lines and that it emerges for both healthy and cancer cells, e.g., as in [Adrian et al., 2021].
From this Figure 3, it is also possible to appreciate how, for a given level of antioxidants, the sparing
                                                                                                         10

effect decreases as the oxygen concentration increases, in agreement with the experiment predictions,
e.g., [Tinganelli et al., 2022a]. Therefore, we hypothesize that the varying responses of normal and tumor
tissues are attributable to distinct redox environments. Given that various tissues and tumors may possess
differing concentrations of antioxidants, which are seldom quantified, our hypothesis could account for
the inconsistent experimental observations regarding the FLASH effect. Moreover, our analysis suggests
a more intricate role than solely oxygenation, which has been the main focus of the community for the
past five years. Indeed, our findings indicate that many parameters contribute to the emergence of the
sparing effect. For instance, a lower antioxidant level, typically observed in in-vitro cells, requires a
reduced dose to trigger a sparing effect. Conversely, as antioxidant levels increase, as seen in healthy
tissue or even more so in tumors, a significantly higher dose is necessary to induce the effect. This aligns
with experimental observations, where in-vitro studies demonstrate a pronounced effect at lower doses
(around 8 Gy), in contrast to in-vivo experiments that require doses exceeding 10 Gy.
      We thus provided a novel mathematical framework, able from one side to reproduce the in-vitro
data at UHDR and to suggest a consistent picture explaining the most relevant features related to the
FLASH observations. Among the novel possibilities enabled by this work is applying the MS-GSM2 to
investigate specific collections of in-vivo data. A major step forward is exploiting the present tool to
facilitate the clinical translation of the FLASH radiation therapy. Indeed, the MS-GSM2 , in principle,
can straightforwardly be used to enable FLASH treatment planning through a specific biologically-driven
optimization of the plan, including organ volume effects, such as in [Battestini et al., 2022].

Material and Methods

Model parameters
     Table S1 reports the values of all model parameters, e.g., the reaction rate constants and the initial
concentrations of the chemical species considered in our simulation. In contrast,e the fitted biological
rates are reported in Table S2 of the SI Appendix.

Computational information and data analyses
    All the simulations, the data fitting, and analyses reported in this work were performed using Julia,
described in detail in the SI Appendix.

Data, Materials, and Software Availability
    The raw data supporting the conclusions of this article will be made available by the authors without
undue reservation.

Acknowledgment
    This work has been partially supported by the INFN CSN5 project FRIDA, and partially funded by
the European Union under NextGenerationEU PRIN 2022 PNRR Prot P2022TX4FE. Walter Tinganelli
and Olga Sokol are gratefully acknowledged for providing the raw data from their experiment. Rudi
Labarbe, Joao Seco, Sergei Vinogradov, and Amitava Adhikary are thanked for fruitful discussions.
                                                                                                                               11

[Abolfath et al., 2023] Abolfath, R., Baikalov, A., Fraile, A., Bartzsch, S., Schüler, E., and Mohan, R. (2023). A stochastic
      reaction–diffusion modeling investigation of flash ultra-high dose rate response in different tissues. Frontiers in Physics,
      11.
[Abolfath et al., 2020] Abolfath, R., Grosshans, D., and Mohan, R. (2020). Oxygen depletion in flash ultra-high-dose-rate
      radiotherapy: A molecular dynamics simulation. Medical physics, 47(12):6551–6561.
[Adrian et al., 2021] Adrian, G., Konradsson, E., Beyer, S., Wittrup, A., Butterworth, K. T., McMahon, S. J., Ghita, M.,
      Petersson, K., and Ceberg, C. (2021). Cancer cells can exhibit a sparing flash effect at low doses under normoxic in
      vitro-conditions. Frontiers in Oncology, 11.
[Adrian et al., 2020] Adrian, G., Konradsson, E., Lempart, M., Bäck, S., Ceberg, C., and Petersson, K. (2020). The flash
      effect depends on oxygen concentration. The British Journal of Radiology, 93(1106):20190702. PMID: 31825653.
[Alanazi et al., 2020] Alanazi, A., Meesungnoen, J., and Jay-Gerin, J.-P. (2020). A Computer Modeling Study of Water
      Radiolysis at High Dose Rates. Relevance to FLASH Radiotherapy. Radiation Research, 195(2):149–162.
[Baikalov et al., 2023] Baikalov, A., Abolfath, R., Schüler, E., Mohan, R., Wilkens, J. J., and Bartzsch, S. (2023). Intertrack
      interaction at ultra-high dose rates and its role in the flash effect. Frontiers in Physics, 11:1215422.
[Battestini et al., 2023] Battestini, M., Missiaggia, M., Attili, A., Tommasino, F., La Tessa, C., Cordoni, F. G., and Scifoni,
      E. (2023). Across the stages: a multiscale extension of the generalized stochastic microdosimetric model (ms-gsm2)
      to include the ultra-high dose rate. Frontiers in Physics, 11.
[Battestini et al., 2022] Battestini, M., Schwarz, M., Krämer, M., and Scifoni, E. (2022). Including volume effects in
      biological treatment plan optimization for carbon ion therapy: Generalized equivalent uniform dose-based objective
      in trip98. Frontiers in Oncology, 12:555.
[Boscolo et al., 2018] Boscolo, D., Krämer, M., Durante, M., Fuss, M., and Scifoni, E. (2018). Trax-chem: A pre-chemical
      and chemical stage extension of the particle track structure code trax in water targets. Chemical Physics Letters,
      698:11–18.
[Boscolo et al., 2020] Boscolo, D., Krämer, M., Fuss, M. C., Durante, M., and Scifoni, E. (2020). Impact of target
      oxygenation on the chemical track evolution of ion and electron radiation. International Journal of Molecular Sciences,
      21(2).
[Boscolo et al., 2021] Boscolo, D., Scifoni, E., Durante, M., Krämer, M., and Fuss, M. C. (2021). May oxygen depletion
      explain the flash effect? a chemical track structure analysis. Radiotherapy and Oncology, 162:68–75.
[Bourhis et al., 2019] Bourhis, J., Sozzi, W. J., Jorge, P. G., Gaide, O., Bailat, C., Duclos, F., Patin, D., Ozsahin, M.,
      Bochud, F., Germond, J. F., Moeckli, R., Vozenin, and C., M. (2019). Treatment of a first patient with flash-
      radiotherapy. Radiother Oncol, 139:18–22.
[Cao et al., 2021] Cao, X., Zhang, R., Esipova, T. V., Allu, S. R., Ashraf, R., Rahman, M., Gunn, J. R., Bruza, P.,
      Gladstone, D. J., Williams, B. B., et al. (2021). Quantification of oxygen depletion during flash irradiation in vitro
      and in vivo. International Journal of Radiation Oncology* Biology* Physics, 111(1):240–248.
[Cartechini et al., 2024] Cartechini, G., Missiaggia, M., Scifoni, E., La Tessa, C., and Cordoni, F. G. (2024). Integrating
      microdosimetric in vitro rbe models for particle therapy into topas mc using the microdosimetry-based modeling for
      rbe assessment (monas) tool. Physics in Medicine & Biology, 69(4):045005.
[Cooper et al., 2022] Cooper, C. R., Jones, D., Jones, G. D., and Petersson, K. (2022). FLASH irradiation induces lower
      levels of DNA damage ex vivo, an effect modulated by oxygen tension, dose, and dose rate. British Journal of
      Radiology, 95(1133):20211150.
[Cordoni et al., 2021] Cordoni, F., Missiaggia, M., Attili, A., Welford, S., Scifoni, E., and La Tessa, C. (2021). Generalized
      stochastic microdosimetric model: The main formulation. Physical Review E, 103(1):012412.
[Cordoni, 2023a] Cordoni, F. G. (2023a). On the emergence of the deviation from a poisson law in stochastic mathematical
      models for radiation-induced dna damage: A system size expansion. Entropy, 25(9):1322.
[Cordoni, 2023b] Cordoni, F. G. (2023b). A spatial measure-valued model for radiation-induced dna damage kinetics and
      repair under protracted irradiation condition. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.14784.
[Cordoni et al., 2022a] Cordoni, F. G., Missiaggia, M., La Tessa, C., and Scifoni, E. (2022a). Multiple levels of stochasticity
      accounted for in different radiation biophysical models: from physics to biology. International Journal of Radiation
      Biology, pages 1–16.
[Cordoni et al., 2022b] Cordoni, F. G., Missiaggia, M., Scifoni, E., and La Tessa, C. (2022b). Cell survival computation
      via the generalized stochastic microdosimetric model (gsm2); part i: The theoretical framework. Radiation Research,
      197(3):218–232.
[Cunningham et al., 2021] Cunningham, S., McCauley, S., Vairamani, K., Speth, J., Girdhani, S., Abel, E., Sharma, R. A.,
      Perentesis, J. P., Wells, S. I., Mascia, A., and Sertorio, M. (2021). Flash proton pencil beam scanning irradiation
      minimizes radiation-induced leg contracture and skin toxicity in mice. Cancers, 13(5).
[Daugherty et al., 2023] Daugherty, E., Mascia, A., Zhang, Y., Lee, E., Xiao, Z., Sertorio, M., Woo, J., McCann, C.,
      Russell, K., Levine, L., Sharma, R., Khuntia, D., Bradley, J., Simone II, C., Perentesis, J., and Breneman, J. (2023).
      Flash radiotherapy for the treatment of symptomatic bone metastases (fast-01): Protocol for the first prospective
      feasibility study. JMIR Res Protoc, 12:e41812.
[Diffenderfer et al., 2020] Diffenderfer, E. S., Verginadis, I. I., Kim, M. M., Shoniyozov, K., Velalopoulou, A., Goia,
      D., Putt, M., Hagan, S., Avery, S., Teo, K., Zou, W., Lin, A., Swisher-McClure, S., Koch, C., Kennedy, A. R.,
      Minn, A., Maity, A., Busch, T. M., Dong, L., Koumenis, C., Metz, J., and Cengel, K. A. (2020). Design,
      implementation, and in vivo validation of a novel proton flash radiation therapy system. International Journal
      of Radiation Oncology*Biology*Physics, 106(2):440–448.
[Epp et al., 1976] Epp, E., Weiss, H., and Ling, C. (1976). Irradiation of cells by single and double pulses of high intensity
      radiation: oxygen sensitization and diffusion kinetics. Current topics in radiation research quarterly, 11(3):201—250.
[Epp et al., 1972] Epp, E. R., Weiss, H., Djordjevic, B., and Santomasso, A. (1972). The Radiosensitivity of Cultured
      Mammalian Cells Exposed to Single High Intensity Pulses of Electrons in Various Concentrations of Oxygen. Radiation
      Research, 52(2):324–332.
[Favaudon et al., 2014] Favaudon, V., Caplier, L., Monceau, V., Pouzoulet, F., Sayarath, M., Fouillade, C., and et al.
      (2014). Ultrahigh dose-rate flash irradiation increases the differential response between normal and tumor tissue in
      mice. Sci Transl Med, 6(245):245ra93.
[Favaudon et al., 2022] Favaudon, V., Labarbe, R., and Limoli, C. L. (2022). Model studies of the role of oxygen in the
                                                                                                                           12

      flash effect. Medical Physics, 49(3):2068–2081.
[Friedl et al., 2022] Friedl, A. A., Prise, K. M., Butterworth, K. T., Montay-Gruel, P., and Favaudon, V. (2022).
      Radiobiology of the flash effect. Medical Physics, 49(3):1993–2013.
[Hu et al., 2021] Hu, A., Qiu, R., Wu, Z., Zhang, H., Li, W. B., and Li, J. (2021). A Computational Model for Oxygen
      Depletion Hypothesis in FLASH Effect. Radiation Research, 197(2):175 – 183.
[Jansen et al., 2021] Jansen, J., Knoll, J., Beyreuther, E., Pawelke, J., Skuza, R., Hanley, R., Brons, S., Pagliari, F., and
      Seco, J. (2021). Does flash deplete oxygen? experimental evaluation for photons, protons, and carbon ions. Medical
      physics, 48(7):3982–3990.
[Kundrát et al., 2020] Kundrát, P., Friedland, W., Becker, J., Eidemüller, M., Ottolenghi, A., and Baiocco, G. (2020).
      Analytical formulas representing track-structure simulations on dna damage induced by protons and light ions at
      radiotherapy-relevant energies. Scientific Reports, 10(1):15775.
[Labarbe et al., 2020] Labarbe, R., Hotoiu, L., Barbier, J., and Favaudon, V. (2020). A physicochemical model of reaction
      kinetics supports peroxyl radical recombination as the main determinant of the flash effect. Radiotherapy and Oncology,
      153:303–310.
[Liew et al., 2021] Liew, H., Mein, S., Dokic, I., Haberer, T., Debus, J., Abdollahi, A., and Mairani, A. (2021). Deciphering
      time-dependent dna damage complexity, repair, and oxygen tension: a mechanistic model for flash-dose-rate radiation
      therapy. International Journal of Radiation Oncology* Biology* Physics, 110(2):574–586.
[Limoli and Vozenin, 2023] Limoli, C. L. and Vozenin, M.-C. (2023). Reinventing radiobiology in the light of flash
      radiotherapy. Annual Review of Cancer Biology, 7(1):1–21.
[Loo et al., 2017] Loo, B., Schuler, E., Lartey, F., Rafat, M., King, G., Trovati, S., Koong, A., and P, M. (2017). Delivery
      of ultra-rapid flash radiation therapy and demonstration of normal tissue sparing after abdominal irradiation of mice.
      Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys, 98(2).
[Michael et al., 1986] Michael, B. D., Davies, S., and Held, K. D. (1986). Ultrafast Chemical Repair of DNA Single and
      Double Strand Break Precursors in Irradiated V79 Cells, pages 89–100. Springer US, Boston, MA.
[Michael P. Gamcsik and Colvin, 2012] Michael P. Gamcsik, Mohit S. Kasibhatla, S. D. T. and Colvin, O. M. (2012).
      Glutathione levels in human tumors. Biomarkers, 17(8):671–691. PMID: 22900535.
[Missiaggia et al., 2024] Missiaggia, M., Cordoni, F. G., Scifoni, E., and Tessa, C. L. (2024). Cell Survival Computation
      via the Generalized Stochastic Microdosimetric Model (GSM2); Part II: Numerical Results. Radiation Research,
      201(2):104–114.
[Montay-Gruel et al., 2019] Montay-Gruel, P., Acharya, M., Petersson, K., Alikhani, L., Yakkala, C., Allen, B., and et al.
      (2019). Long-term neurocognitive benefits of flash radiotherapy driven by reduced reactive oxygen species. Proc Natl
      Acad Sci USA, 116(22):10943–10951.
[Montay-Gruel et al., 2021] Montay-Gruel, P., Acharya, M. M., Gonçalves Jorge, P., Petit, B., Petridis, I. G., Fuchs, P.,
      Leavitt, R., Petersson, K., Gondré, M., Ollivier, J., Moeckli, R., Bochud, F., Bailat, C., Bourhis, J., Germond, J.-F.,
      Limoli, C. L., and Vozenin, M.-C. (2021). Hypofractionated flash-rt as an effective treatment against glioblastoma
      that reduces neurocognitive side effects in mice. Clin Cancer Res, 27(3):775–784.
[Montay-Gruel et al., 2017] Montay-Gruel, P., Petersson, K., Jaccard, M., Boivin, G., Germond, J., Petit, B., and et al.
      (2017). Irradiation in a flash: Unique sparing of memory in mice after whole brain irradiation with dose rates above
      100gy/s. Radiother Oncol, 124(3):365–369.
[Neta et al., 1990] Neta, P., Huie, R. E., and Ross, A. B. (1990). Rate Constants for Reactions of Peroxyl Radicals in Fluid
      Solutions. Journal of Physical and Chemical Reference Data, 19(2):413–513.
[Petersson et al., 2020] Petersson, K., Adrian, G., Butterworth, K., and McMahon, S. J. (2020). A quantitative analysis of
      the role of oxygen tension in flash radiation therapy. International Journal of Radiation Oncology* Biology* Physics,
      107(3):539–547.
[Pratx and Kapp, 2020] Pratx, G. and Kapp, D. S. (2020). Corrigendum: A computational model of radiolytic oxygen
      depletion during flash irradiation and its effect on the oxygen enhancement ratio (2019 phys. med. biol. 64 185005).
      Physics in Medicine & Biology, 65(10):109501.
[Ramos-Méndez et al., 2020] Ramos-Méndez, J., Domı́nguez-Kondo, N., Schuemann, J., McNamara, A., Moreno-Barbosa,
      E., and Faddegon, B. (2020). Let-dependent intertrack yields in proton irradiation at ultra-high dose rates relevant
      for flash therapy. Radiation Research, 194(4):351–362.
[Riahi et al., 2010] Riahi, Y., Cohen, G., Shamni, O., and Sasson, S. (2010). Signaling and cytotoxic functions of
      4-hydroxyalkenals. American Journal of Physiology-Endocrinology and Metabolism, 299(6):E879–E886. PMID:
      20858748.
[Scholz and Kraft, 1996] Scholz, M. and Kraft, G. (1996). Track structure and the calculation of biological effects of heavy
      charged particles. Advances in Space Research, 18(1):5–14.
[Scifoni et al., 2013] Scifoni, E., Tinganelli, W., Weyrather, W. K., Durante, M., Maier, A., and Krämer, M. (2013).
      Including oxygen enhancement ratio in ion beam treatment planning: model implementation and experimental
      verification. Physics in Medicine & Biology, 58(11):3871.
[Spitz et al., 2019] Spitz, D. R., Buettner, G. R., Petronek, M. S., St-Aubin, J. J., Flynn, R. T., Waldron, T. J., and
      Limoli, C. L. (2019). An integrated physico-chemical approach for explaining the differential impact of flash versus
      conventional dose rate irradiation on cancer and normal tissue responses. Radiotherapy and Oncology, 139:23–27.
[Sørensen et al., 2022] Sørensen, B. S., Sitarz, M. K., Ankjærgaard, C., Johansen, J. G., Andersen, C. E., Kanouta, E.,
      Grau, C., and Poulsen, P. (2022). Pencil beam scanning proton flash maintains tumor control while normal tissue
      damage is reduced in a mouse model. Radiotherapy and Oncology, 175:178–184.
[Tan et al., 2023] Tan, H. S., Teo, K. B. K., Dong, L., Friberg, A., Koumenis, C., Diffenderfer, E., and Zou, J. W. (2023).
      Modeling ultra-high dose rate electron and proton flash effect with the physicochemical approach. Physics in Medicine
      & Biology, 68(14):145013.
[Tessonnier et al., 2021] Tessonnier, T., Mein, S., Walsh, D. W., Schuhmacher, N., Liew, H., Cee, R., Galonska, M.,
      Scheloske, S., Schömers, C., Weber, U., Brons, S., Debus, J., Haberer, T., Abdollahi, A., Mairani, A., and Dokic,
      I. (2021). Flash dose rate helium ion beams: First in vitro investigations. International Journal of Radiation
      Oncology*Biology*Physics, 111(4):1011–1022.
[Thompson et al., 2023] Thompson, S. J., Prise, K. M., and McMahon, S. J. (2023). Investigating the potential contribution
      of inter-track interactions within ultra-high dose-rate proton therapy. Physics in Medicine & Biology, 68(5):055006.
                                                                                                                         13

[Tinganelli et al., 2022a] Tinganelli, W., Sokol, O., Quartieri, M., Puspitasari, A., Dokic, I., Abdollahi, A., Durante, M.,
     Haberer, T., Debus, J., Boscolo, D., Voss, B., Brons, S., Schuy, C., Horst, F., and Weber, U. (2022a). Ultra-high
     dose rate (flash) carbon ion irradiation: dosimetry and first cell experiments. International Journal of Radiation
     Oncology*Biology*Physics, 112(4):1012–1022.
[Tinganelli et al., 2022b] Tinganelli, W., Weber, U., Puspitasari, A., Simoniello, P., Abdollahi, A., Oppermann, J., Schuy,
     C., Horst, F., Helm, A., Fournier, C., and Durante, M. (2022b). Flash with carbon ions: Tumor control, normal tissue
     sparing, and distal metastasis in a mouse osteosarcoma model. Radiotherapy and Oncology, 175:185–190.
[Vozenin et al., 2019] Vozenin, M., De Fornel, P., Petersson, K., Favaudon, V., Jaccard, M., Germond, J., and et al. (2019).
     The advantage of flash radiotherapy confirmed in mini-pig and cat cancer patients. Clin Cancer Res, 25(1):35–42.
[Vozenin et al., 2022] Vozenin, M.-C., Bourhis, J., and Durante, M. (2022). Towards clinical translation of flash
     radiotherapy. Nature Reviews Clinical Oncology, 19(12):791–803.
[Wanstall et al., 2024] Wanstall, H. C., Korysko, P., Farabolini, W., Corsini, R., Bateman, J. J., Rieker, V., Hemming, A.,
     Henthorn, N. T., Merchant, M. J., Santina, E., Chadwick, A. L., Robertson, C., Malyzhenkov, A., and Jones, R. M.
     (2024). Vhee flash sparing effect measured at clear, cern with dna damage of pbr322 plasmid as a biological endpoint.
     Scientific reports., 14(1).
[Wardman, 2020] Wardman, P. (2020). Radiotherapy using high-intensity pulsed radiation beams (flash): A radiation-
     chemical perspective. Radiation Research, 194(6):607–617.
[Weber et al., 2022a] Weber, U. A., Scifoni, E., and Durante, M. (2022a). Flash radiotherapy with carbon ion beams.
     Medical Physics, 49(3):1974–1992.
[Weber et al., 2022b] Weber, U. A., Scifoni, E., and Durante, M. (2022b). Flash radiotherapy with carbon ion beams.
     Medical Physics, 49(3):1974–1992.
[Weinan et al., 2019] Weinan, E., Li, T., and Vanden-Eijnden, E. (2019). Applied stochastic analysis, volume 199.
     American Mathematical Soc.
[Zakaria et al., 2020] Zakaria, A. M., Colangelo, N. W., Meesungnoen, J., Azzam, E. I., Plourde, M.-E., and Jay-Gerin,
     J.-P. (2020). Ultra-High Dose-Rate, Pulsed (FLASH) Radiotherapy with Carbon Ions: Generation of Early, Transient,
     Highly Oxygenated Conditions in the Tumor Environment. Radiation Research, 194(6):587–593.
[Zhou, 2020] Zhou, G. (2020). Mechanisms underlying flash radiotherapy, a novel way to enlarge the differential responses
     to ionizing radiation between normal and tumor tissues. Radiation Medicine and Protection, 1(1):35–40.
[Zhu et al., 2021] Zhu, H., Li, J., Deng, X., Qiu, R., Wu, Z., and Zhang, H. (2021). Modeling of cellular response after
     flash irradiation: a quantitative analysis based on the radiolytic oxygen depletion hypothesis. Physics in Medicine &
     Biology, 66(18):185009.


Appendix

Model parameters

                                          Table 1: Chemical stage parameters

 Parameters         Value/Range                                                                                   Reference
                          7          −1
 k1                 5 · 10 (M · s)                                         [Labarbe et al., 2020, Spitz et al., 2019]
                                                          [Neta et al., 1990, Epp et al., 1976, Michael et al., 1986]
 k2                 104 (M · s)−1                                          [Labarbe et al., 2020, Riahi et al., 2010]
 k3                 6.62 · 107 (M · s)−1                                                        [Labarbe et al., 2020]
 k4                 103 (M · s)−1                                                               [Labarbe et al., 2020]
 k5                 109 (M · s)−1                                                               [Labarbe et al., 2020]
 k6                 101 0 (M · s)−1                                                             [Labarbe et al., 2020]
 k7                 4.62 · 104 (M · s)−1                                                        [Labarbe et al., 2020]
 k8                 5 · 107 (M · s)−1                                                           [Labarbe et al., 2020]
 k9                 102 (M · s)−1                                               [Spitz et al., 2019, Wardman, 2020]
 [O2 ]0             0 − 21 %                  [Adrian et al., 2020, Tessonnier et al., 2021, Tinganelli et al., 2022a]
 [RH]               1M                                                                          [Labarbe et al., 2020]
 [cat]              0.08 · 10−6 M                                                               [Labarbe et al., 2020]
 [Fe2+ ]            8.9 · 10−7 M                                                                [Labarbe et al., 2020]
 [XSH]              6.5 · 10−3 M                                                                [Labarbe et al., 2020]


                                            Table 2: Fitted biological rates

                Experiment          Reference                           a [1/h]        b [1/h]     r [1/h]
                           −                                                 −3              −2
                DU145, e            [Adrian et al., 2020]           7.82 · 10      1.83 · 10          3.23
                A549, 4 He          [Tessonnier et al., 2021]       4.70 · 10−3    1.34 · 10−2        4.51
                CHO-K1, 12 C        [Tinganelli et al., 2022a]      4.21 · 10−3    2.43 · 10−2        3.68
                                                                                                                   14

    In Table 1, we report all the values of the chemical parameters used in our simulations of the system
of Ordinary Differential Equations (ODEs) in Eq. (2) and the corresponding references.
    In Table 1, we show the biological rates obtained by comparing the results of MS-GSM2 with the
experimental data. In particular, the first line corresponds to the results in Figure 2a, the second line to
Figure 2b, the third line to Figure 2c.

Computational information and data analyses


Algorithm 1 MS-GSM2
 1: Notation:

                h1+4(d−1) (x, ξ) = rxd ,       h2+4(d−1) (x, ξ) = axd ,        h3+4(d−1) (x, ξ) = bxd (xd − 1) ,
                                                                                         1+4N
                                                                                          Xd
                h4+4(d−1) (x, ξ) = ρ(ξ d ) ,       h1+4Nd (x, ξ) = d˙ ,    h(x, ξ) :=           hi (x, ξ) .
                                                                                         i=1

 2: start with an initial chemical environment ξ(t) = ξ0 , biological system X(t) = Y (t) = 0 and initial
      time t = 0;
 3: set Ti = 0, for i = 1, . . . , 1 + 4Nd ;
 4: while t < T do
 5:     for all hi , i = 1, . . . , 1 + 4Nd do
 6:         generate a random number Ri ∼ U (0, 1) and set Ui := log R1i ;
 7:         compute τi solving       Z             t+τi
                                                          hi (X(s), ξs )ds = Si − Ti .
                                               t

              We use the convention that if hi (X(t), ξs ) = 0, then τi = ∞;
 8:      end for
 9:      select τ := min(i=1,...,1+4Nd ) τi ;
10:      select the corresponding rate hi at which the minimum is attained;
11:      solve the chemical system for ξ in the time interval [t, t + τ ];
12:      for all hi , i = 1, . . . , 1 + 4Nd do
13:          set                                        Z t+τ
                                              Ti = Ti +       hi (X(s), ξs )ds ,
                                                               t
14:         update t = t + τ ;
15:         if i = 1 + 4(d − 1), for some d = 1, . . . , Nd , then
16:             update X(t) = X(t) − 1, Y (t) = Y (t) and ξ(t) = ξ(t);
17:         else if i = 2 + 4(d − 1), for some d = 1, . . . , Nd , then
18:             update X(t) = X(t) − 1, Y (t) = Y (t) + 1 and ξ(t) = ξ(t);
19:         else if i = 3 + 4(d − 1), for some d = 1, . . . , Nd , then
20:             update X(t) = X(t) − 2, Y (t) = Y (t) + 1 and ξ(t) = ξ(t);
21:         else if i = 4 + 4(d − 1), for some d = 1, . . . , Nd , then
                           (c,d)       (c,d)
22:             simulate ZY ;i and ZX;i ;
                                               (c,d)                       (c,d)
23:            update X(t) = X(t) + ZX;i , Y (t) = Y (t) + ZY ;i and ξ(t) = ξ(t);
24:         else if i = 4Nd , then
25:            simulate the position where the track hits;
26:            compute the total specific energy deposition z according to microdosimetric spectra;
27:            for d = 1 to Nd do
28:                compute the specific energy deposition z d according to an amorphous track model;
                               (c,d)    (c,d)
29:                simulate ZY ;d and ZX;d according to equation (??);
                                                    (c,d)                      (c,d)
30:              update X(t) = X(t) + ZX;d , Y (t) = Y (t) + ZY ;d and ξ(t) = ξ(t) + Gξ ρz d ;
31:           end for
32:       end if
33:    end for
34: end while
35: end the system.
                                                                                                           15

     All the simulations, the data fitting, and analyses reported in the main text were performed using
Julia. In Algorithm 1, we show the stepwise construction of the MS-GSM2 , that is based on a Stochastic
Simulation Algorithm (SSA) [Weinan et al., 2019]. It allows us to solve the system in Eq. (7).
     We use a Rosenbrock method, in particular the Rodas4 solver of the DifferentialEquations.jl package,
for the numerical integration of the chemical system of ODEs, described in Eq. (2), that is coupled with
the parameters reported in Table 1, and with all initial conditions set to zero, except to the oxygen, as
shown in Table 1. This assumption is because while oxygen is an environmental chemical species, all the
others are directly produced by radiation or the reactions between chemical species.
     For the comparison of the MS-GSM2 results with the in vitro experiments, shown in Figure 2, we
optimize the biological rates, reported in Table 1, on experimental data at standard conditions, i.e.,
conventional irradiation, and normoxia (21% O2 ). In particular, we use a cross-entropy method to
obtain the best combination of a, b, and r rates, allowing us to describe all the experimental points.
We start from an interval [lj , uj ] of possible realistic values for these biological rates j ∈ a, b, r, i.e.
a ∈ [10−3 , 10−1 ] 1/h, b ∈ [10−3 , 10−1 ] 1/h, and r ∈ [2.0, 5.0] 1/h. We randomly sample 103 values
of log a, log b, and log r from uniform
                                      distributions [log lj , log uj ]. We compute the normalized mean
                                                            2
square error, i.e. NMSE = mean (Sexp − SM S−GSM 2 ) /Sexp , as proposed in [?], and we consider
the best 50 values, that we call NMSE50 . We calculate the biological rates lj,min (min (NMSE50 )) and
uj,max = j (max (NMSE50 )), with j ∈ a, b, r. We consider the new intervals, i.e. [log lj,min , log uj,max ],
and we repeat N-times the previous procedure, selecting, in the end, the best combination of a, b, and r.
     As discussed in the main text, the creation process of indirect DNA Rdamages is described by a Poisson
                                                                           t  ¯ • ](s) ds. The modulation
random variable of average κI (LET, [O2 ], [ROO• ]t ) = κ (LET, [O2 ]) ϱ 0 [ROO
        Rt
term ϱ 0 [ROO• ](s) ds of DNA lesions is normalized to 1, on average over the nucleus, to be consistent
with the DNA damage yield at standard conditions [Kundrát et al., 2020], i.e., conventional irradiation
and 21 % O2 . At the same time, it naturally decreases as the oxygenation level decreases and the dose
rate increases, in such a way that the average damage yield κ (LET, [O2 ], [ROO• ]t ) is in agreement with
the Oxygen Enhancement Ratio (OER) formulation [Scifoni et al., 2013, Epp et al., 1972] for conventional
irradiation.
