Resource Estimation for Quantum Variational Simulations of the Hubbard Model
Zhenyu Cai∗
Department of Materials, University of Oxford, Oxford, OX1 3PH, United Kingdom and
Quantum Motion Technologies Ltd, Nexus, Discovery Way, Leeds, LS2 3AA, United Kingdom
(Dated: July 1, 2020)
As the advances in quantum hardware bring us into the noisy intermediate-scale quantum (NISQ)
era, one possible task we can perform without quantum error correction using NISQ machines is
the variational quantum eigensolver (VQE) due to its shallow depth. A specific problem that we
can tackle is the strongly interacting Fermi-Hubbard model, which is classically intractable and
has practical implications in areas like superconductivity. In this Article, we outline the details
about the gate sequence, the measurement scheme and the relevant error mitigation techniques for
the implementation of the Hubbard VQE on a NISQ platform. We perform resource estimation
for both silicon spin qubits and superconducting qubits for a 50-qubit simulation, which cannot
be solved exactly via classical means, and find similar results. The number of two-qubit gates
required is on the order of 20000. Hence, to suppress the mean circuit error count to a level such
that we can obtain meaningful results with the aid of error mitigation, we need to achieve a two-
qubit gate error rate of ∼ 10−4
. When searching for the ground state, we need a few days for one
gradient-descent iteration, which is impractical. This can be reduced to around 10 minutes if we
distribute our task among hundreds of quantum processing units. Hence, implementing a 50-qubit
Hubbard model VQE on a NISQ machine can be on the brink of being feasible in near term, but
further optimisation of our simulation scheme, improvements in the gate fidelity, improvements in
the optimisation scheme and advances in the error mitigation techniques are needed to overcome
the remaining obstacles. The scalability of the hardware platform is also essential to overcome the
runtime issue via parallelisation, which can be done on one single silicon multi-core processor or
across multiple superconducting processors.
I. INTRODUCTION
The difficulty of simulating large quantum systems was
an inspiration for the idea of quantum computation [1],
thus naturally, we look to quantum system simulation
as one of the first applications of quantum computers.
Fault-tolerant simulation of a non-trivial system requires
an integrated quantum device with at least hundreds of
thousands of qubits given a gate infidelity of 10−3
or tens
of thousands of qubits given a gate infidelity of 10−4
[2].
This is still out of reach with the current technology.
With the advance of qubit counts and gate error rates
bringing us into the noisy intermediate-scale quantum
(NISQ) era, one must wonder if there is a classically
intractable and physically meaningful task such NISQ
hardware can tackle without quantum error correction.
One of the most promising candidates is the variational
quantum eigensolver (VQE) due to its shallow depth. In
VQE, we aim to use a parametrised quantum circuit to
prepare the eigenstate (usually the ground state) of a
given Hamiltonian. The task is carried out through mea-
suring observables using the quantum circuit and opti-
mising the parameters using a classical computer. As we
will see later, one of the lowest hanging fruits in this area
is the preparation of the ground state of the strongly in-
teracting Fermi-Hubbard model, which is what we will
be focusing on in this Article.
A huge number of circuit runs are needed to run
VQE [3]. Luckily, the task is highly parallelisable and
∗ cai.zhenyu.physics@gmail.com
thus can be distributed to many quantum processors.
Both silicon spin qubits and superconducting qubits are
good candidates for such a task due to their compati-
bility with the commercial fabrication technology [4, 5],
which should reduce the cost and enhance the reliabil-
ity of reproducing multiple quantum processors for the
same task. Furthermore, we presently explain that the
ansatz circuit of the Hubbard model that we are inter-
ested in can be naturally broken into the native gates of
both silicon spin qubits and superconducting qubits. In
this Article, we will first use silicon spin qubits as our ex-
ample platform to carry out our gate count and runtime
analysis and then we will apply the same analysis to the
superconducting qubits.
The Article is structured as follows, we begin by in-
troducing the concept of VQE and why we choose to
simulate the Hubbard model in Section II. Then we will
outline the ansatz circuit we use and its gate counts for
the silicon platform in Section III. To deal with the noise
in the circuit, we will apply error mitigation to our ex-
ample circuit in Section IV. Following that, in Section V
we will introduce more details about our implementation
and the estimated algorithm runtime on the silicon plat-
form. In Section VI, we will apply the same analysis to
the superconducting platform. This is followed by our
conclusion in Section VII.
arXiv:1910.02719v4 [quant-ph] 30 Jun 20202
II. VARIATIONAL QUANTUM EIGENSOLVER
A. Background
For a given Hamiltonian H, we want to find a circuit
that can prepare its ground state |ψ0i with the associ-
ated ground state energy E0. We try to achieve this
with a circuit with tunable gates that have M parame-
ters ~ θ = {θ1,θ2,··· ,θM} that we can control, which will
produce an output state ψ(~ θ)
E
. In VQE, Our goal is
to obtain the set of optimal parameters ~ θop such that
the state prepared by the circuit can well approximate
the ground state we want ψ(~ θop)
E
≈ |ψ0i. Then we
can measure various properties of the ground state us-
ing ψ(~ θop)
E
. Refs [6] and [7] provide a comprehensive
overview on variational algorithms and more generally
the field of quantum computational chemistry.
B. Choosing the Simulation Problem and its
Corresponding Ansatz
The parametrised circuit in VQE is called an ansatz
circuit, or simply ansatz for short. It determines the
quantum subspace that our output state can reach, hence
it is the key to the success of our algorithm. An example
of a simple ansatz is called the hardware-efficient ansatz
(HEA) [8], which just uses gates available to the physical
qubit systems to create many entangling blocks along the
circuit. However, it is difficult to obtain an analytical or
even a heuristic estimate of the number of gates required
in an HEA for the success of our algorithm. A better
approach will be using an ansatz inspired by the problem
itself. For example, the unitary-coupled-cluster ansatz
(UCCA) for quantum chemistry [9], the low depth circuit
ansatz (LDCA) [10] and the Hamiltonian ansatz (HA) [3]
for more general simulations of closed quantum systems.
The number of gates needed by HA scales as O(NblkR)
where R is the number of subterms in the Hamiltonian of
our simulation and Nblk is the number of repeating blocks
within the ansatz. For a general electronic structure
Hamiltonian (which applies to most chemistry Hamilto-
nians), we have R ∼ O(N4
) due to the terms accounting
for electron-electron interactions [3]. For periodic sys-
tems, the added structure allows us to transform our
basis orbitals to achieve R ∼ O(N2
) [11]. One of the
systems that has the most favourable scaling while main-
taining great physical interest is the 2D Hubbard model,
in which by restricting to only on-site interactions and
nearest-neighbour hopping, we can achieve R ∼ O(N).
Using HA to simulate the Hubbard model, the gates we
apply are dependent on the qubit encoding we use. Us-
ing the Jordan-Wigner encoding, some of the gates will
be non-local, which can be overcome by using O(N
1
2 )
additional gates [12]. Other encodings like Verstraete-
Cirac encoding [13] or superfast encoding [14] will en-
sure locality, but require at least doubling the number
of qubits. Since we are focusing on near-term devices in
which qubit resources can be limited, we will only con-
sider the Jordan-Wigner encoding in this Article. In such
case, the number of gates needed to simulate the 2D Hub-
bard Model using HA scales as Ngates ∼ O(NblkN
3
2 ).
This is a factor of N
1
2 better than LDCA assuming the
same number of blocks Nblk in both ansatze. To achieve
results of sufficient precision, we likely need to go up to
double excitation for UCCA, which means a gate scaling
of Ngates ∼ O(N5
) (assuming Jordan-Wigner encoding,
see Ref [7]). To achieve similar precision, Nblk for HA is
likely to scale better than O(N
7
2 ) based on the previous
Hubbard model numerical simulation results [3, 15, 16],
thus HA should have a scaling advantage over UCCA in
simulating the Hubbard model.
Hence, in the rest of this Article, we will be focusing on
the ground state preparation of the Hubbard model us-
ing Hamiltonian Ansatz (HA) under the Jordan-Wigner
encoding.
Note that for the NISQ regime that we are interested
in, the constants we ignored in the above scaling analysis
can make a very significant difference. Thus there might
exist other problems with a different ansatz implementa-
tion that are more practical than the one we are going
to consider when we dig into the exact implementation
details.
III. ANSATZ CIRCUIT
A. 2D Fermi-Hubbard Model
The Hamiltonian of the 2D Fermi-Hubbard model is:
H = −t
X
σ,hv,wi
a†
v,σaw,σ + a†
w,σav,σ

+ U
X
v
nv,↑nv,↓
where a†
v,σ/av,σ are the creation/annihilation operators
of site v with spin σ. The first term represents the near-
est neighbour hopping interactions, with t being the tun-
nelling energy and hv,wi representing summing up sites
v and w that are adjacent to each other in a 2D geometry.
The second term is the on-site repulsion energy.
Extracting the ground state properties of the Hubbard
model in the parameter regime of e.g. U
t ≈ 4 → 8 at
close to half-filling is believed to be relevant to the un-
derstanding of high-Tc cuprate superconductors [17, 18].
However, solutions using classical methods have high de-
gree of uncertainty in this parameter regime [17], leading
to our attempt here using quantum algorithms. In this
Article, for simplicity we will be considering the half-
filling case, i.e. for V sites we have V electrons, but most
of our arguments can be generalised to any number of
electrons.
Using the Jordan-Wigner encoding, each qubit will en-
code one orbital. There are two spin orbitals to each site,3
hence the number of qubits (N) needed is twice the num-
ber of sites (V ). For a classically intractable 50-qubit
problem, we will be looking at V = 25, e.g. a 5×5 Hub-
bard model. It is important to note that even though a
Hubbard Hamiltonian of this size cannot be solved ex-
actly classically, there are various approximation meth-
ods available [17].
In the Jordan-Wigner encoding, the Fermionic creation
and annihilation operators become:
a†
i 7→ Z:iA†
i
ai 7→ Z:iAi
where i denotes the index of the canonical ordering of the
orbitals (including both spins and sites). A = |0ih1| =
X+iY
2 is the qubit lowering operator and A†
is the qubit
raising operator. Z:i =
Qi−1
j=1 Zj is the Z operator string
that maintains the Fermionic commutation relationship.
The on-site repulsion term and the hopping term of
the Hubbard Hamiltonian thus becomes:
ninj = a†
iaia†
jaj 7→
1
4
(I − Zi)(I − Zj)
a†
iaj + a†
jai 7→
1
2
(XiXj + YiYj)Zi:j
(1)
where we have without loss of generality assumed j > i
and defined Zi:j =
Qj−1
k=i+1 Zk.
B. Hamiltonian Ansatz
The Hamiltonian ansatz was proposed by Wecker et
al. [3]. Its circuit is essentially a Trotterised variational
annealing path, which is inspired by both adiabatic state
preparation and the quantum approximate optimisation
algorithm [19, 20].
For a Hamiltonian of the form:
H =
X
i
λihi
where hi are different interaction terms, a block of the
Hamiltonian ansatz is just:
Y
i
e−iθihi
i.e. we implement a parametrised unitary gate corre-
sponding to every interaction term. We will implement
Nblk of such blocks in sequence with different sets of pa-
rameters. The Hamiltonian ansatz, though inspired by
Trotterised annealing, is not equivalent to Trotterisation.
Thus a Hamiltonian ansatz using higher-order Trotteri-
sation does not necessarily have lower algorithmic errors
than a Hamiltonian ansatz using lower-order Trotteri-
sation. In NISQ devices, we might want to avoid us-
ing higher-order Trotterisation in the Hamiltonian ansatz
due to higher gate counts and deeper circuits. Hence,
here we have used the first-order Trotter formula for the
Hamiltonian ansatz.
From Eq. (1), we see that the gates corresponding to
the repulsion terms are all local, while the gates that cor-
respond to hopping will only be local if the two orbitals
involved are close to each other in the canonical ordering
due to the trailing Z string.
FIG. 1. The black arrows denote the canonical order of the
orbitals of different sites for a 5×5 Hubbard model. Here the
ordering is in a snake-fold pattern running along the horizon-
tal direction. The red/blue curly lines denote the even/odd
hopping interaction.
Now if we choose a canonical ordering such that the
two spin orbitals of the same site are always adjacent to
each other, while the orbitals of different sites are ordered
in a folding pattern running along the horizontal direc-
tion as shown in Fig. 1, then all the horizontal hopping
terms will be local while some of the vertical hopping
terms will not be. The non-local vertical hopping can be
made local by using additional Fermionic swap (fSWAP)
gates to swap the canonical order of the orbitals [21]:
fi,i+1
swap 7→
1
2
[(XiXi+1 + YiYi+1) + Zi + Zi+1].
Kivlichan et al. [12] outline a way to implement a block
of the Hamiltonian ansatz for the open boundary 2D
Hubbard model using only local gates with O(N
1
2 ) depth
using a Fermionic swap network. The exact structure of
this ansatz is recapped in Appendix A1. In Appendix A,
we have decomposed the gates corresponding to the re-
pulsion terms, the hopping terms and the Fermionic swap
into the native gates of silicon spin qubits, and found that
we only need single-qubit Z rotation and partial swaps.
Then we applied the gate decompositions to the Hamil-
tonian ansatz, optimised the circuit using the qubit ex-
change symmetry of the gates, and obtained the number
of single-qubit gates and two-qubit gates needed for one4
block of Hamiltonian ansatz for V sites to be:
N1q,ha = 4V
3
2 + 7V − 4
√
V
N2q,ha = 8V
3
2 + V − 4
√
V .
For V = 25, we have
N1q,ha ≈ 650
N2q,ha ≈ 1000.
C. Full Ansatz Circuit
To produce a good approximation to the Hubbard
ground state, we need a good starting state for the Hamil-
tonian ansatz. In the context of adiabatic evolution, a
good starting state should be in the same phase as the
output state as discussed by Wecker et al. [18]. Since the
Hamiltonian ansatz evolves out of adiabatic evolution,
we should expect a similar result to hold. The starting
state we use should be a single Slater determinant, which
can be solved classically and can be efficiently prepared
using a quantum circuit [12, 22], e.g. the ground state of
the non-interacting Hubbard Hamiltonian (i.e. U = 0).
In Appendix B we have recapped the details about the
Slater determinant preparation circuit using Givens rota-
tion. We decomposed the Givens rotation into the native
gates of silicon spin qubits and again found that we only
need Z rotation and partial swaps. Then we applied the
gate decompositions to the Slater determinant prepara-
tion circuit, optimised the circuit and obtained the num-
ber of single-qubit gates and two-qubit gates needed for
V sites to be:
N1q,prep = 2V 2
N2q,prep = 2V 2
.
When the two spin subspaces of the starting state are
decoupled (e.g. the non-interacting Hubbard ground
state), we can prepare the Slater determinant separately
in the two spin subspaces, which is also discussed in Ap-
pendix B. In this case, we need to start in a orbital or-
dering in which the spin-up and spin-down are separated,
and end in a orbital ordering in which the spin-up and
spin-down are interleaved for inputting into the Hamil-
tonian ansatz. We found that the saving in gate counts
is limited due to the need to rearrange the orbital or-
dering while the runtime needed is longer. Hence, here
we will stick with the simple Slater determinant prepa-
ration scheme in which we do not consider the two spin
subspaces separately.
The total number of gates needed for the whole ansatz
circuit on the silicon-spin-qubit platform is:
N1q = 2V 2
|{z}
N1q,prep
+

4V
3
2 + 7V − 4
√
V

| {z }
N1q,ha
Nblk
N2q = 2V 2
|{z}
N2q,prep
+

8V
3
2 + V − 4
√
V

| {z }
N2q,ha
Nblk.
Hence, if Nblk scales better than O(
√
V ), then the Slater
determinant preparation will dominate the gate count at
large V , otherwise the Hamiltonian ansatz will dominate
the gate count at large V . In the previous simulation
of the Hubbard model in a ladder grid structure with
periodic boundaries [3], Nblk scales super-linear to V ,
while Ref [15, 16] also shows similar results for the open-
boundary Hubbard model. Hence, we will expect the
gate cost due to the Slater determinant preparation part
of the circuit to be negligible at large V .
If we take the optimistic assumption of Nblk ∼ V , then
the number of gates needed in the ansatz circuit for V =
25 on the silicon-spin-qubit platform will be:
N1q ≈ 17000
N2q ≈ 26000.
(2)
Across all major qubit platforms, the error rate of the
single-qubit gates is generally much lower than that of the
two-qubit gates. If we assume an optimistic two-qubit
gate error rate of around 10−4
and a negligible single-
qubit gate error rate, the expected number of errors in
each circuit run (which we will call the mean circuit error
count from here on) is:
µ = 26000 × 10−4
∼ 2.5, (3)
which is still of the order of unity. Hence, to obtain a
meaningful result out of our noisy circuit, we must apply
error mitigation.
IV. ERROR MITIGATION
VQE is inherently robust against local systematic er-
rors since they can be offset by shifts in the variational
parameters [23], which was observed in experiments [24].
For the other error components, we can further mitigate
them via symmetry verification.
A. Symmetry Verification
It is often the case that there are some symmetries
that the resultant state must follow. Suppose we want to
obtain the expectation value of an observable O using the
output state, and we know that our output state must
follow the symmetry S. We can measure both O and S
in every circuit run and discard the runs that fail the
symmetry test to obtain the error-mitigated expectation
value [25, 26], which is called direct verification. Suppose
the fraction of circuit runs that passed the symmetry test
is PS, then we need a factor of
CS =
1
PS
(4)
more circuit runs to implement direct verification. CS
here is the sampling cost factor of direct verification.5
In the case that O and S cannot be measured in the
same run and S is a Pauli symmetry with eigenvalues
s = ±1, the symmetry-verified expectation value OS can
be obtained via post-processing instead [25]:
OS =
O + sOS
1 + sS
. (5)
Here we have assumed O commute with S, which is often
the case when O is a term in the Hamiltonian since many
symmetries of the ground state follow from the symme-
tries of the Hamiltonian. As shown in Ref. [27], the cost
of post-processing verification will be the square of that
of direct verification.
B. Symmetry Verification in Hubbard Model
Simulation
In the case of the preparing the Hubbard model ground
state, we can verify the electron number parity symmetry
Sσ =
Y
i
(1 − 2ni)
of the output state. Here ni is the number operator of
the ith orbital. In the Jordan-Wigner encoding, it simply
maps to the product of all Z operators:
Sσ =
Y
i
Zi.
As shown in Appendix F, in the silicon platform, we can
measure both the energy terms and the symmetry Sσ
in the same circuit runs, enabling us to perform direct
verification.
In fact, since our ansatz circuit also conserves the elec-
tron number within each spin subspace, by using a start-
ing state with the right number of spin-up and spin-down
electrons, we can actually verify the electron number par-
ity symmetry within each spin subspace, which we will
denote as S↑ and S↓.
The ansatz circuit can be decomposed into two-qubit
components that represent different interaction terms,
fSWAPs and Given rotations as listed in Appendix A2.
We will assume there are M of these components in the
circuit, all are affected by depolarising channels with er-
ror probability p, which means that the mean circuit error
count is:
µ = Mp. (6)
In between the two-qubit components where the errors
occur, our state will have well-defined S↑ and S↓ (though
the set of qubits that correspond to each spin subspace
may be different from the final state due to the use of
fSWAP). Hence, if a Pauli error occurs here and anti-
commutes with S↑, it will flip the S↑ eigenvalue, leading
to a failed S↑ test at the end. Since S↑ is the product
of Z operators in the spin-up subspace, detectable errors
will be the Pauli errors whose total weights in X and
Y are odd. Similar arguments also apply to S↓ in the
spin-down subspace.
There are two types of two-qubit components in the
circuit, for which we will make two different approxima-
tions to their error channels:
• The components acting within one spin subspace:
Within the 16 two-qubit Pauli error components
(including the identity), we can detect the errors
with one X or Y in it, which is half of them. Hence,
for these two-qubit components, their depolarising
errors can be approximated by the composition of a
detectable error channel and an undetectable error
channel, both with the error probability p
2.
• The components acting across both spin subspaces:
Within the 16 two-qubit Pauli error components
(including the identity), 4 are undetectable, 4 are
detectable only by S↑, 4 are detectable only by S↓
and 4 are detectable by both. For simplicity, we will
absorb the last case into the other two detectable
cases and approximate the depolarising channel by
the composition of three error channels:
1. An undetectable error channel with the error
probability p
4.
2. An error channel detectable by the S↑ with
the error probability 3p
8 .
3. An error channel detectable by the S↓ with
the error probability 3p
8 .
Our circuit consists of alternating layers of these two
types of two-qubit components, thus there are approx-
imately equal numbers of components for each type (i.e.
M
2 ). Hence, when we focus only on the spin-up sub-
space, there are around M
4 components acting within the
subspace with detectable error probability p
2 and around
M
2 components acting across both spin subspaces with
detectable error probability 3p
8 , which gives a total de-
tectable mean circuit error count of
µd =
M
4
p
2
+
M
2
3p
8
=
5Mp
16
=
5µ
16
(7)
In the large circuit limit, the probability that l detectable
errors occur in the spin-up subspace will follow the Pois-
son distribution with the mean µd:
Pl = e−µd
µl
d
l!
.
The exact same arguments can be applied to the spin-
down subspace which gives the same equations.
When focusing on one of the symmetries, only odd
numbers of detectable errors will be detected since an
even number of occurrences will commute with S↑/S↓,
hence the fraction of circuit runs that pass the verification6
of S↑/S↓ is:
PS,one =
X
even l
Pl = e−µd
cosh(µd) =
1 + e−2µd
2
.
Since in our error channel approximations, events of S↑
violation and S↓ violation are independent of each other,
we can obtain the fraction of circuit runs that pass the
verification of both S↑ and S↓ as:
PS = P2
S,one =
1
4
1 + e−2µd
2
.
Hence, using Eq. (4) and Eq. (7), the sampling cost factor
of applying symmetry verification using S↑ and S↓ is
CS ∼
1
PS
= 4 1 + e−2µd
−2
= 4

1 + e−5µ
8
−2
. (8)
When focusing on one of the symmetry, the expected
number of circuit errors detectable by S↑/S↓ after sym-
metry verification is:
µS,one =
X
even l
Pl
PS,one
l =
µd
PS,one
X
odd l
Pl = µd tanh(µd).
Since the error events of S↑ violation and S↓ violation are
independent of each other, we can obtain the resultant
mean circuit error rate after applying symmetry verifica-
tion using both S↑ and S↓:
µS = µ − 2µd + 2µS,one =
3µ
8
+
5µ
8
tanh

5µ
16

(9)
where we have made use of Eq. (7). Hence, the mean
circuit error count is reduced by a fraction of:
µ − µS
µ
=
5
8

1 − tanh

5µ
16

(10)
after symmetry verification.
Note that the key quantity in our error mitigation anal-
ysis is the mean circuit error count µ = Mp, not the gate
error rate p. Hence, even though we are discussing in
terms of two-qubit components here instead of elemen-
tary gates, as long as we are using a realistic µ, all of our
estimates will be very similar to what we can obtain by
considering elementary gates.
As shown in Eq. (3) and later in Eq. (22), we are in-
terested in the cases in which the original mean circuit
error count is around 2:
µ ∼ 2.
Substituting into Eq. (8), we can obtain the symmetry
verification cost factor:
CS ≈ 2.4. (11)
After applying symmetry verification using both S↑ and
S↓, we should expect the mean circuit error count reduce
by around 30% using Eq. (10).
C. Error Extrapolation
In the previous section, we have argued that we can
reduce the mean circuit error count by a sizeable fraction
using symmetry verification. However, the mean circuit
error count is still not negligible, thus we need to employ
another error mitigation technique – error extrapolation
– to extract useful information out of our noisy circuit.
We will write the average value of the observable O
obtained from a quantum circuit with mean circuit error
count µ as Oµ. If we run the circuit with the minimal
error rate µ to obtain Oµ, and we boost the error rate by
a factor of λ to obtain Oλµ, then an estimate of the error-
free observable expectation value O0 can be obtained via
linear extrapolation [28, 29]:
O0 =
λOµ − Oλµ
λ − 1
. (12)
Linear extrapolation has been successfully im-
plemented experimentally on superconducting plat-
forms [30], in which the error is boosted via changing
the time length of the control pulses. Similar methods
can be applied to the silicon platform. When the mean
circuit error count increase, we can probe at more error
rates and go beyond linear extrapolation to Richardson
extrapolation to improve our estimation accuracy [29].
For large quantum circuits, there has been numeri-
cal evidence showing that it might be more appropriate
to extrapolate along an exponential curve instead [31].
However, the act of symmetry verification might violate
some assumptions for exponential extrapolation, thus
changing the shape of the extrapolation curve. Hence,
in order to combine symmetry verification with error ex-
trapolation, here we will focus on linear extrapolation.
D. Combination
As shown in Section IVB, symmetry verification can
reduce the mean circuit error count. To combine symme-
try verification with error extrapolation, we simply apply
symmetry verification to the two observables in Eq. (12):
OSE =
λOS,µ − OS,λµ
λ − 1
. (13)
here OSE is the error-mitigated observable after both
symmetry verification and error extrapolation while OS,µ
is the symmetry-verified observable at mean circuit error
count µ.
Using Eq. (8), the cost of symmetry verification is given
by:
CS,λ = 4

1 + e−5λµ
8
−2
. (14)
Hence, using Eq. (13) and assuming Var[Oµ] =7
Var[Oλµ], we have
Var[OSE] =
λ2
CS,1 + CS,λ
(λ − 1)
2 Var[Oµ]
Hence, for each sample of OSE, we need to take CSE
total samples of Oµ and Oλµ to achieve same precision
level, where
CSE = 2
λ2
CS,1 + CS,λ
(λ − 1)
2
= 8
λ2

1 + e−5µ
8
−2
+

1 + e−5λµ
8
−2
(λ − 1)
2 .
The factor of 2 is to account for the samples of both Oµ
and Oλµ.
For µ = 2, λ = 2, we have:
CSE ∼ 25. (15)
i.e. if we want to apply symmetry verification and two-
point linear extrapolation with λ = 2 to our example, we
need 25 times more circuit runs to obtain an estimated
observable than sampling from the circuit directly. The
combination of symmetry verification and error mitiga-
tion was proven to be very effective in numerical simu-
lations [26]. In our example, we managed to suppress
the original mean circuit error count by almost 30% us-
ing symmetry verification. Together with the robustness
of the variational circuits against local systematic errors,
they should enable efficient applications of error extrapo-
lation, and thus allowing us to extract meaningful results
out of our noisy quantum circuit.
V. VQE IMPLEMENTATION
A. Parametrising the Hamiltonian Ansatz
We have outlined the structure of the ansatz circuit in
Section III, now we will turn to the way we parametrise
the gates in the circuit. In the simplest scheme, we can
assign a different parameter to each parametrised gate to
allow an unconstrained optimisation of the ansatz circuit.
However, a large number of parameters will mean a large
number of dimensions in the parameter space. This can
lead to difficulties in optimisation and may lead to long
runtime since we need to probe more directions to obtain
the gradient vector. Hence, here we will try to reduce the
number of parameters by using the symmetry of the site
layout.
For the open-boundary Hubbard model, the site layout
has mirror symmetries along the horizontal and vertical
direction. Thus the 2D Hubbard grid can be sliced into
four equivalent partitions: Neq = 4. On top of that if we
have the same number of rows and columns, then the site
layout also has an additional diagonal mirror symmetry,
which gives Neq = 8. The ground state of the Hubbard
model is expected to follow the same symmetry.
The input Slater determinant should follows the same
layout symmetry, hence so does the ansatz parametrisa-
tion. That is, the parametrised gates that represent the
corresponding interaction terms in different equivalent
partitions, which can be mapped to each other via layout-
symmetry transformations, will share the same parame-
ters.
Hence, the number of parameters in our ansatz is:
Npara ≈
Nsite
paraV
Neq
Nblk. (16)
where Nsite
para is the number of parameters per site.
Ignoring the boundary case, there will be 5 interac-
tion terms associated with each site: the repulsion term
and the horizontal and vertical hopping terms of the two
spins. The input Slater determinant and the output
ground state must have the same spin symmetry since
our ansatz preserves spins. Hence, the ansatz parametri-
sation will also have the same spin symmetry. Without
spin-flip symmetry, the parameters for the spin-up and
spin-down hopping terms will be different, thus 5 inter-
action terms means 5 parameters: Nsite
para = 5. With spin-
flip symmetry, the gates for the spin-up and spin-down
hopping terms can share the same set of parameters, thus
Nsite
para = 3. If we are considering the half-filling ground
state with the smallest total spin, then:
• Odd number of sites (electrons): different numbers
of spin-up and spin-down electrons, which means
no spin-flip symmetry and Nsite
para = 5.
• Even number of sites (electrons): same number
of spin-up and spin-down electrons, which means
spin-flip symmetry and Nsite
para = 3.
For the Hubbard model with periodic boundaries along
the horizontal direction, we have translational symmetry
of the sites along the horizontal direction, which means
that all columns are equivalent on top of the vertical
mirror symmetry we have, giving Neq = 2Ncol. This can
lead to fewer parameters. However, as we will discuss
in Section VB, the vertical interaction terms cannot be
measured locally and efficiently in this case, thus we will
not consider such a boundary condition.
For the Hubbard model with periodic boundaries in
both directions, we have complete translational symme-
try and thus every site is equivalent. However, we will
also not consider this case since there is not yet an effi-
cient Hamiltonian ansatz circuit for the periodic Hubbard
model with a gate count and scaling as favourable as the
one we have adopted for the open-boundary case.
B. Measurement
The measurement of energy is carried out by measuring
the individual Pauli components of the Hamiltonian. The8
Pauli components within an individual repulsion term or
a hopping term commute with each other. Thus with the
availability of non-demolishing measurements, ideally we
should be able to measure all the commuting interaction
terms at one go. For the Hubbard model, there are five
commuting subsets as shown in Fig. 1: repulsion terms,
even horizontal hopping terms, odd horizontal hopping
terms, even vertical hopping terms and odd vertical hop-
ping terms. Thus we should be able to obtain one sam-
ple of each interaction term in five circuit runs. How-
ever, direct measurements of the vertical hopping terms
can be costly due to their non-locality. These non-local
terms can be broken down into non-local Pauli observ-
ables, which in turn can be obtained by performing local
Pauli measurements and multiplying the results. How-
ever, such local measurements can break the commuta-
tivity of the vertical hopping terms such that we cannot
measure them in parallel.
For the case of the open-boundary Hubbard model,
we can tackle this by switching the canonical ordering
of orbitals from running horizontally in the 2D grid to
running vertically when we try to measure the vertical
hopping terms. In such a way, just like the horizontal
hopping terms are local in the horizontal-running canon-
ical order, the vertical hopping terms will also be local in
the vertical-running canonical order. Note that switching
the orbital canonical order will require us to switch the
ansatz accordingly, but the same parameters will be used
for the parametrised gates that correspond to the same
interaction terms. In such a way, we can still obtain one
sample of all interactions terms in five circuit runs. The
same measurement scheme can be used to measure the
energy gradients since it involves the same Pauli mea-
surements with some small modifications to the ansatz
circuit (see Appendix D2).
Now on top of obtaining the energy or energy gradient
by measuring the Pauli components Gj of the Hubbard
Hamiltonian, we also want to apply direct symmetry ver-
ification outlined in Section IVA by measuring the sym-
metry operator S in the same run. However, it is often
the case that S is not local, thus to obtain S we need to
rely on local measurements and post-processing.
In our example, there is no need to measure the elec-
tron number parity symmetry, it can be obtained by com-
posing the measurement results of the interaction terms.
When measuring the repulsion terms, we will be perform-
ing single-qubit Z measurement for every qubit. The re-
pulsion terms and the electron number parity can both
be obtained via post-processing. In the case of measuring
the hopping terms, we will be measuring XX and Y Y for
the hopping pairs adjacent to each other in the canonical
order. We can obtain the results of ZZ measurements
by composing XX and Y Y (with an additional − sign),
composing with the Z measurements of the qubits not
included in the hopping pairs, we can then obtain the
electron number parity via post-processing.
It is worth noting that the Hubbard model simula-
tion is quite friendly for efficient local measurements of
the Hamiltonian terms. For more general problems, one
might need to turn to more sophisticated measurement
schemes [27, 32, 33].
In the above scheme, we have assumed we can carry out
non-demolishing measurements, which can be carried out
in silicon using ancilla qubits. In Appendix F, we outline
a possible quantum dot layout that enables an efficient
implementation of our measurement scheme.
C. Optimisation Method
We need to employ classical optimisation algorithms to
obtain the optimal set of parameters for our parametrised
quantum circuit. There are two general approaches, di-
rect search and gradient-based. Direct search involves
evaluating the cost function at different points and choos-
ing the next set of points to evaluate based on the known
points of the cost function, while gradient-based meth-
ods make use of the gradient of the cost function. In our
case, since we are searching for the ground state, the cost
function that we want to minimise is the energy of the
state produced by our quantum circuit.
The energy can be straightforwardly evaluated by mea-
suring the Pauli components of the Hamiltonian as men-
tioned in Section VB. As discussed in Ref. [34], to com-
pete with the best classical algorithm for Hubbard model
simulation, we need to estimate the energy per site to
the precision E,site = 10−3
t. In Appendix E, we have
translated this precision requirement into the precision
requirement on the estimates of each Hamiltonian Pauli
term. For the 5 × 5 Hubbard model, the number of cir-
cuit runs needed to estimate the energy to the required
precision is:
ME ≈ 4 × 105
. (17)
The gradient vector can be evaluated using finite differ-
ence, which involves evaluating the energy at two neigh-
bouring points. In the simplest gradient descent scheme,
by evaluating the energy points used in finite difference
to the precision E,site and also choosing the terminating
threshold of the change in energy to be E,site, we will
be able to find the local energy minimum with the re-
quired precision E,site given the right gradient-descent
step size. In such a case, we will need twice the num-
ber of measurements compared to energy estimation to
evaluate the gradient in one direction (since we need to
evaluate two energy points). We have Npara directions to
probe, thus the number of circuit runs needed to evaluate
the full energy gradient vector using finite difference is:
Mfd
grad = 2NparaME. (18)
Using Eq. (16) and assuming Nblk ∼ V , for 5×5 Hubbard
model, the number of circuit runs needed to estimate the
full gradient vector using finite difference is:
Mfd
grad = 2NparaME ≈ 3.1 × 108
.9
The precision of the gradient vector obtained here is de-
pendent on the finite difference step size we choose. In
Appendix E, we have outlined how to obtain the optimal
step size and the gradient precision grad that we can
achieve using this optimal step size.
The gradient vector can also be evaluated using di-
rect measurements of a modified ansatz circuit. The
two approaches to obtain the gradient were compared
in Refs. [9, 35], in which they explain that more mea-
surements are needed in finite difference to overcome
the finite step size approximation it makes. We further
compare them for our implementation in Appendix E,
taking into account of the fact that we have the many
parametrised gates share the same parameters due to
the symmetries in the site layout. We found that direct
measurements require fewer samples compared to finite
difference as the number of gates with shared parameters
increases. In Appendix E, we explain that to achieve the
same gradient precision grad achieved above using finite
difference (with the optimal step size), the number of
circuit runs required using direct measurements is:
Mgrad ≈ 2.5 × 107
(19)
which is an order of magnitude better than finite differ-
ence in this case.
Direct search methods are generally more effective in
noisy and non-smooth problems while for gradient-based
methods, the number of function calls needed usually
scales better in higher dimensional problems [36]. We
have also proven above that evaluating the full gradient
vector is usually much more costly than evaluating an
energy point in our implementation. We can see that
neither of the approaches are clearly preferred. Vari-
ous direct search optimisation methods like Nelder-Mead
simplex have been successfully implemented experimen-
tally [37–43] for small-size problems due to the robust-
ness of direct search against noise, while gradient-based
method like SPSA, which requires a smaller number of
samples than simple gradient descent due to its stochas-
tic nature, have also found success in the simulations of
small molecules [8, 30, 44]. With improvements in the
quantum hardware noise rate, we will expect gradient-
based methods to play a more and more important role
in the experimental realisation of VQE, especially con-
sidering the success of advanced gradient-based methods
like Adam and Adagrad in high dimension noisy opti-
misation problems in classical machine learning [45, 46].
There are also investigations into using machine learning
for optimisation [47, 48], which might have faster conver-
gence rate and higher robustness to noise. In the end,
the optimisation scheme is likely to involve a combina-
tion of various methods, with the aid of techniques like
block-by-block optimisation [3] and sequential optimisa-
tion [49].
Cade et al. [16] have performed numerical simulation
of the Hubbard VQE using SPSA optimisation. They
followed a three-stage protocol with coarser gradient pre-
cision at the beginning and moving to finer and finer gra-
dient precision as the optimisation progress. In the end
they evaluated the gradient using finite-difference with
the number of circuit runs for each energy estimation be-
ing ME ∼ 5×104
(this is different from our result above
due to different precision requirements). Their 3×3 Hub-
bard simulations converge when the number of circuit
runs is around Mtot ∼ 2 × 108
. There are 30 parame-
ters in their circuit, using Eq. (18), we can translate the
result of their simulation into the language of simple gra-
dient descent, the number of ‘effective’ gradient descent
iteration in their simulation is just:
niter =
Mtot
Mfd
grad
=
Mtot
2NparaME
= 67.
As mentioned above, the gradient-based method has been
shown to scale extremely well with increased problem
dimensions in practice. Thus, we can expect the number
of ‘effective’ gradient descent iteration needed for 5 × 5
Hubbard simulation will also be in the region of
niter ∼ 100. (20)
D. Algorithm Runtime for Silicon Spin Qubits
Here we will estimate the algorithm runtime needed
for running the VQE for the 5×5 open-boundary Fermi-
Hubbard model.
From Appendix A and B, we know the runtime Tcirc
needed for the ansatz circuit with Slater determinant
preparation is:
Tcirc ≈ (49 + 45Nblk)τ1q + (196 + 80Nblk)τ2q + τin + τm
where τ1q and τ2q are the typical time needed to perform
a π
2 rotation for Z rotation and partial swap respectively,
and τin, τm are the time required for qubit initialisation
and measurements.
In silicon quantum dot spin qubits, the Z rotations
can be implemented using the Stark shift at the speed
τ1q ∼ 0.1µs [50]. Partial swaps can be implemented using
exchange interaction at sub-ns scale [51]. Here instead
we will assume a two-qubit-gate time of tens of ns to pre-
vent the gate fidelity being limited by the finite voltage
rise time [52]. For readout, a scheme that can achieve
more than 98% fidelity in under 6µs has been demon-
strated [53], and a sub-µs scheme with 99.7% fidelity has
been proposed [54]. For initialisation, the simplest way
is via spin relaxation, which will be on the ms timescale.
Faster initialisation can be achieved via spin-selective
tunnelling from charge reservoirs [55] or electron shut-
tling and ‘hotspot reset’ [56–59]. Initialisations at the
µs scale have been achieved in silicon donor qubits [60]
and other semiconductor quantum dot qubits [61]. Thus
here we will assume the time needed for initialisation plus
readout can be reduced to below 100µs. Hence, for the
5 × 5 Hubbard model with Nblk = V = 25, the runtime10
needed for each circuit run is around
Tcirc ∼ 250µs.
In Section VC, we have obtained the number of circuit
runs needed for estimating the energy and the energy gra-
dient vector. However, as mentioned in Section IV, due
to the high mean circuit error count, we need to apply
error mitigation. The sampling cost of applying both di-
rect symmetry verification and linear error extrapolation
is CSE ∼ 25 as shown in Eq. (15). Thus the number of
circuit runs needed to estimate the energy and the energy
gradient vector with error mitigation is:
M∗
E = CSEME ≈ 1 × 107
M∗
grad = CSEMgrad ≈ 6 × 108
.
(21)
Thus the time needed to evaluate the error-mitigated en-
ergy and energy gradient is:
TE = TcircM∗
E = 2500 s
Tgrad = TcircM∗
grad = 1.5 × 105
s ≈ 1.7 days.
Using the simplest optimisation scheme, gradient de-
scent, each iteration step then involves the evaluation
of one gradient vector, which requires 1.7 days. Such
a long duration per iteration is hardly practical. How-
ever, the time cost is mostly due to the large number of
samples needed, thus can be easily solved by running
many circuits in parallel in multiple quantum proces-
sors. With 200 processors, the time required for each
gradient-descent iteration is reduced to around 10 min-
utes, thus making gradient descent feasible runtime-wise
even if we require thousands of iterations for convergence.
In Eq. (20), we have estimated the number of iterations
required to be on the order of a hundred, which will corre-
sponds to a total runtime of around 1 day. 200 processors
will mean 104
qubits, which can easily fit onto a single
silicon chip along with the classical controls and mea-
surement devices required, giving us one single integrated
multi-core processor for the task. We stress that these
cores would be independent of one another. Of course, we
do not assert that simple gradient descent would neces-
sarily be able to find the solution for the problem size we
are considering. However, its runtime feasibility should
be indicative of the runtime of the other more advanced
gradient-based methods.
VI. RESOURCE ESTIMATES FOR
SUPERCONDUCTING QUBITS
When we switch from the silicon spin qubits to su-
perconducting qubits, most of our arguments apply ex-
cept we need to decompose our circuit using a differ-
ent gate set and a different set of hardware operation
times. For the superconducting qubits, a natural two-
qubit gate to use for the Hubbard model simulation will
be the partial iSWAP gate [62], which is implemented
using XY-interaction and is just the hopping interaction
gate we need to implement. The differences between par-
tial iSWAP and partial SWAP have been discussed by
Schuch et al. [63]. By using partial iSWAP as our only
elementary two-qubit gate, it also enable us to implement
all Z rotations virtually [64]. As derived in Appendix C,
for the 5 × 5 Hubbard model with the number of ansatz
blocks equal to the number of sites, the gate counts are:
N1q ≈ 2500
N2q ≈ 14000.
Comparing to Eq. (2), we can see a massive decrease
in the single-qubit gate count due to the use of virtual
Z gates, which in turn reduces our fidelity requirement
for the single-qubit gates. However, applying virtual Z
gate would require us to implement partial iSWAP with
a range of different frequency tunings [64], which would
increase the difficulties in calibrating the partial iSWAP
gates. We also see a reduction in the number of two-qubit
gates required, but it is still of the same order and thus
will lead to a similar gate fidelity requirement ∼ 10−4
.
The resultant mean circuit error count is reduced to
µ ∼ 1.5, (22)
which will lead to improved performance of the error mit-
igation techniques. Individual superconducting quantum
processor of size ∼ 50 has been experimentally demon-
strated to be able to perform certain tasks that cannot
be performed efficiently on any classical computers [65].
There have also been demonstrations of successful imple-
mentations of various error mitigation techniques on the
superconducting platform [30, 66].
The runtime required for one circuit run as derived in
Appendix C is
Tcirc ≈ 125τ1q + 650τ2q + τin + τm.
where τ1q τ2q, τin and τm are the time required for single-
qubit gates, two-qubit gates (iSWAP), initialisation and
readout, respectively. In superconducting qubits, we
have τ1q ∼ 20ns [67], τ2q ∼ 200ns [62] and τin ∼ τm ∼
100ns [68, 69]. Thus the total runtime is around:
Tcirc ≈ 150µs
which is similar to the runtime estimate for silicon qubits.
The difference is that the runtime bottleneck here is the
two-qubit gate speed while in silicon the two-qubit gates
contribute the least to the overall runtime compared to
the other operations.
Using Eq. (21), the time needed to evaluate the error-
mitigated energy and energy gradient are:
TE = TcircM∗
E = 1500 s
Tgrad = TcircM∗
grad = 1 × 105
s ≈ 1.2 days
which are also similar to the silicon platform.11
Parallelisation in multiple quantum processors is still
essential to bring the total runtime down to a practi-
cal level. We need around 150 superconducting-qubit
quantum processors, each with 50 qubits (thus a total
of around 7500 qubits), to bring time required for each
gradient-descent iteration to around 10 minutes. The
number of quantum processors required is similar to that
of the silicon spin qubits. However, unlike silicon spin
qubits which can easily fit all of the required quantum
processors in the same chip, the superconducting proces-
sors likely need to be distributed into multiple chips due
to a lower qubit density.
VII. CONCLUSION
In this Article, we have investigated the resource re-
quirements on obtaining the ground state of a Hamilto-
nian in a quantum computer using VQE, in which the
Hamiltonian cannot be solved exactly classically. The
Hamiltonian we have chosen is the 5 × 5 open-boundary
Fermi-Hubbard model due to its favourable scaling in
both circuit size and depth. We began our analysis by
considering silicon spin qubits as our example hardware
platform for the resource estimation. Our ansatz circuit
makes use of one of the latest schemes for the input Slater
determinant preparation [22] and the Hubbard Hamilto-
nian ansatz implementation [12], which translates into
17000 single-qubit gates (all are Z rotations) and 26000
two-qubit gates (all are partial swaps) assuming the num-
ber of Hamiltonian blocks in the ansatz is equal to the
number of sites. Hence, with perfect single-qubit Z rota-
tions and a two-qubit gate error rate on the order of 10−4
,
we can achieve a circuit error of ∼ 2.5. To obtain mean-
ingful results with this mean circuit error count, we must
incorporate error mitigation techniques like error extrap-
olation and symmetry verification for which we have dis-
cussed their combined application to our example. We
have devised a measurement scheme that allows us to es-
timate various terms in the Hamiltonian in parallel and
apply symmetry verification at the same time. Bringing
all these together, we have estimated the runtime needed
for one circuit execution on the silicon-spin-qubit plat-
form to be around 250µs and thus one iteration in a sim-
ple gradient descent optimisation is around 1.7 days due
to the large number of samples needed. Hence, we have
to run VQE in parallel across multiple quantum proces-
sors to reduce the runtime to a feasible level. Around 200
quantum processors with 50 data qubits each, which can
easily fit onto a single silicon chip, can reduce the time
required for one gradient-descent iteration to around 10
minutes, and the estimated total algorithm runtime in
this case will be around 1 day.
We then applied the same analysis to superconduct-
ing qubits. We found a large reduction in the number of
single-qubit gates due to the ability to implement all Z
rotation virtually by using partial iSWAP as our elemen-
tary two-qubit gate. By assuming a two-qubit gate error
rate of 10−4
and an equal or lower single-qubit gate error
rate, we can achieve a mean circuit error count of ∼ 1.5.
To implement the same algorithm, the circuit runtime
is around 150µs and thus one gradient-descent iteration
takes around 1.2 days. This can be reduced to around
10 minutes if we parallelise our task across 150 super-
conducting quantum processors. Resource estimates for
other qubit platforms can be readily obtained by follow-
ing similar arguments.
To implement Hubbard VQE on NISQ machines, the
first key difficulty is to maintain the mean circuit error
count at the order of unity or less so that error mitiga-
tion can be effective. Superconducting qubits have the
advantage here due to the lower gate counts from the
good fit of its elementary gate set to the problem, and
the recent demonstration of high performance supercon-
ducting quantum processors of the relevant size [65]. The
second key difficulty is the extremely long runtime due
to the huge number of circuit runs required, which mo-
tivates the necessity of parallelising our tasks over hun-
dreds or thousands of quantum processors. Silicon spin
qubits have better potential here due to its higher qubit
density, enabling us to easily fit all of these quantum pro-
cessing units into one single multi-core processor, leaving
a smaller and more manageable physical footprint.
We can see that implementing a 50-qubit Hubbard
model VQE on a NISQ machine sits right at the bound-
ary of being practical in terms of gate counts and mean
circuit error count. Hence, even a constant factor im-
provement in the mean circuit error count can have big
impacts on bringing such an application of NISQ ma-
chines into reality, which can be brought about via fur-
ther optimisation of our simulation schemes, improve-
ments in the gate fidelity, improvements in the optimi-
sation scheme and advances in the error mitigation tech-
niques. We also need to rely on parallelisation to tackle
the runtime issue. It is worth noting that the number of
qubits required in noisy VQE can become comparable to
the fault-tolerant implementation. In the case of VQE,
what we need is a lot of independent small units for par-
allelisation instead of a single integrated device, which
should massively reduce the difficulties in manufacturing
and calibration even if the total number of qubits is of the
same order. However, this also places great emphasis on
the ability of the hardware platform to reproduce many
copies of the quantum processor once we manage to man-
ufacture a good one. Both of the platforms we discussed
have advantages in this respect since their compatibil-
ity with commercial CMOS fabrication technology can
provide a high-precision, relatively low-cost and highly
reproducible manufacturing process.
Due to the large number of hyper-parameters in VQE,
our gate and runtime estimates are only indicative of the
canonical case. There can be variability in the estimates
when we choose a different set of hyper-parameters. One
important assumption we made is the number of ansatz
blocks in the circuit is equal to the number of sites:
Nblk = V , which is an optimistic assumption given what12
we have observed in the numerical simulations for small
size system [3, 15, 16]. An increase in Nblk will lead to
a linear increase in the gate counts and a quadratic in-
crease in the runtime (due to the increase in both the
gate counts and the parameter counts).
Any increase in the gate counts will lead to an increase
in the mean circuit error count, which needs to be sup-
pressed using stronger error mitigation. For example,
instead of two-point error extrapolation, we can sample
at more error rates, which will increase the number of
circuit runs. We can also try to verify for additional sym-
metries. However, when we have multiple symmetries, it
might not be possible to measure the energy terms along
with all the symmetries using local measurements in a
single circuit run any more, which may lead to additional
runtime overhead. It is also worth exploring the possible
combinations with other error mitigation techniques like
quasi-probability [29, 31], to try to gain improvements
in estimation accuracy and/or sampling costs. We can
also try to develop new error mitigation techniques. One
possible avenue could be tailoring the noise in real ma-
chines using simple gates to increase the sensitivity of
our symmetry verification against the noise. The effec-
tiveness of a similar idea in the context of a quantum
error correction code has been shown [70].
Any increase in the algorithm runtime can be miti-
gated via further parallelisation by adding more quan-
tum processors. Without any sudden large changes in
the parameters during the optimisation, we should ex-
pect the energy and the energy gradient change in a rel-
atively smooth manner as the optimisation progresses.
Hence, we can use the energy and the energy gradients
we obtained in the previous steps as the prior for the es-
timation of the new energy and the energy gradients in a
Bayesian manner [71]. This should enable us to achieve
the same precision using much fewer samples and thus
much shorter algorithm runtime. Other important fac-
tors that can influence the algorithm runtime include the
way we parametrised our circuit and the exact optimi-
sation algorithm we choose, both worth further explo-
rations.
Since our ansatz circuit has a relatively short depth
(O(N
1
2 )), the main limiting factor preventing us from
simulating the Hubbard model much beyond the size 5×5
is due to the increased gate counts and the resultant in-
creased mean circuit error count. Stronger error mitiga-
tion or even new error mitigation can only alleviate this
problem. To fully tackle this, one possibility is to switch
to a different kind of qubit encoding: the Majorana loop
stabiliser code [72]. This encoding allows local vertical
hopping terms using mediator qubits, thus no Fermionic
swap network is needed and we can achieve a Hamilto-
nian ansatz block and a Slater determinant preparation
circuit with depth O(1). Furthermore, it can detect and
correct single-qubit errors. Hence, it can potentially sup-
press circuit errors and take us much beyond our current
problem size. However, more qubits are needed for the
encoding and we need to implement higher-weight opera-
tors for the interaction terms. In addition, when consid-
ering the stabiliser checks, we need to consider the errors
introduced in implementing the check circuits and the
connectivity requirement on the hardware. On the other
hand, we may implement these stabiliser checks in a post-
processing way similar to symmetry verification [73], but
many more circuit runs will be needed.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The author would like to thank Sam McArdle, Yuan
Xiao and Simon Benjamin for reading through the
manuscript and providing valuable insights. The author
would also like to thank Sofia Patomäki, Michael Fog-
arty and John Morton for discussions on the hardware
implementation.
The author acknowledges support from Quantum Mo-
tion Technologies Ltd.13
Appendix A: Hubbard Model Hamiltonian Ansatz
1. Simulation scheme
Here we recap the scheme to implement the 2D open-
boundary Hubbard model Hamiltonian ansatz as de-
scribed in [12]. We will be considering a 2D Hubbard
models of V sites, with the starting canonical ordering of
the orbitals as shown in Fig. 2.
1 2 3
6 5 4
7 8 9
(a)
1↑
1↓ 2↓
2↑ 3↑
3↓
6↑
6↓ 5↓
5↑ 4↑
4↓
7↑
7↓ 8↓
8↑ 9↑
9↓
(b)
FIG. 2. (a) The layout and labelling of the sites in a 3-by-3
Hubbard model. (b) The corresponding canonical ordering of
the orbitals at the beginning of the circuit. The two rows of
different colours denote different spins.
Gates will be local if they are applying to the orbitals
adjacent to each other in the canonical ordering. In the
canonical ordering shown in Fig. 2, the orbitals of the
same site and different spins are adjacent to each other,
enabling the application of local parametrised on-site re-
pulsion gates. To apply local hopping gates, we need
to apply fermionic swaps to the orbitals to move them
around in the canonical ordering. There are two types
of fermionic swaps that we can apply: swaps between or
within spins, which corresponding to swaps between or
within rows for the orbital layout in Fig. 2. The swap
scheme in [12] involving alternating swaps within and
between spins. Now suppose we focus only on the spin-
down orbitals. The spin-down orbitals start in row 2 in
which we can only perform local swaps and local hopping
interactions between the even pairs of orbitals. Then we
swap between spins, moving spin down to row 1, and now
we can do local swaps and local hopping interactions be-
tween the odd pairs of orbitals. Repeating these steps
will enable us to alternate between odd- and even-pair
swaps and hopping interactions within the spin-down or-
bitals, which are interleaved with swaps between the two
spins. Such a scheme can apply all relevant hopping in-
teractions in a local manner as shown in Fig. 3.
We will define an edge pair as a pair of sites that are
adjacent to each other in the canonical ordering and are
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
2 1 3 4 6 5 8 7 9
2 3 1 6 4 5 8 9 7
3 2 1 6 5 4 9 8 7
3 1 2 5 6 4 9 7 8
1 3 2 5 4 6 7 9 8
time arrow
: hopping interaction : Fermionic swap
FIG. 3. The scheme for swapping spin-down orbitals and
applying the relevant hopping interactions for a 3×3 Hubbard
model. In between steps, there are also swaps between the
two spins that we did not show. In the end, the spin orbitals
return to the original ordering, enabling the application of
the next block of the Hamiltonian ansatz. A similar scheme
is applied to the spin-up orbitals except that it starts with
odd-pair swaps first.
vertical neighbours in the site layout. For example, in
Fig. 2, the edge pairs are (3,4) and (6,7). The way we
perform one block of Hamiltonian ansatz is by repeating
2 ∗ Ncol rounds of the following two steps:
1. Swap between spins: swapping orbitals of the same
sites but different spins.
2. Swap within the same spins, except for edge pairs
on which we perform hopping interaction instead.
This will return all the orbitals to their original positions.
Within the process, we need to
• Substitute step 1 in the first round with repulsion
interactions and swaps between spins.
• Substitute step 2 in the first and last round with
hopping interactions and swaps interaction within
same spins, except for edge pairs on which we only
perform hopping interactions, no swaps.
We can also implement the periodic boundary condition
in the horizontal direction by adding a pair of hopping
interaction into certain rounds of step 2.
2. Gate count analysis for ansatz
The gates in the Hubbard model simulation scheme
are parametrised gates for on-site repulsion, adjacent-
site hopping, fermionic swaps and combinations of them.
Here we will decompose them into single-qubit rotations
and partial swaps, which form one of the basic gate sets
in silicon qubits.
We will find the hopping gates, the fermionic swaps,
and the fSWAP+hopping all starts with Zπ
2
and end14
with Z−π
2
on one of the qubits. For on-site repulsion
and fSWAP+repulsion, we have Z−π
2
at the end and we
can easily add an Zπ
2
in front by adding a Z rotation
pair Zπ
2
Z−π
2
. All of these gates are symmetric under the
exchange of qubits, thus we can choose which qubit to
place the Z rotations.
We will choose to place these Z rotation on the odd
qubits in the spin-up space and on the even qubits in the
spin-down space. In this way, these Z rotation will cancel
1
. For the hopping term, the fermionic swap and the
fSWAP+hopping, this means removing two single-qubit
rotations. For on-site repulsion and fSWAP+repulsion in
which we have added a Z rotation pair Zπ
2
Z−π
2
in front,
the gate counts do not change.
In the following section, we will use the below notations
for the time units of the gates:
• τ1q: the time unit for a single-qubit gate, which is
the time needed to perform a π
2 rotation. We will
assume the time needed to carry out a single-qubit
gate with a variable parameter, i.e. gates like Zθ,
is on average τ1q.
• τ2q: the time unit for a two-qubit gate, which is the
time needed to perform a
√
SWAP. We will assume
the time needed to carry out a partial swap with
a variable parameter, i.e. gates like SWAPθ, is on
average τ2q.
The decompositions of the gates into partial swaps and
single-qubit rotations and their resource estimates are
shown below:
• On-site repulsion: UU(θ) = e−iθ
2 (I−Z1)(I−Z2)
SWAP 2θ
SWAP
3
2
Z−2θ
√
SWAP
Zπ
2
Z−π
2
Gate counts: G1q,U = 3, G2q,U = 3.
Time needed: τU = 4τ1q + 6τ2q
• Hopping interaction: Ut(θ) = e−iθ
2 (XX+Y Y )
1 Note that in each iteration, we will have
√
V − 1 interactions
within the same spin, while we have
√
V interaction in between
different spins, hence, the Z gate on one of the dot will not be
cancelled, this will be the last dot in either the spin up space
or the spin-down space. Also, the Z rotations at the beginning
and the end of the circuit are not cancelled. However, when
estimating the number of gates needed, for a large number of
sites (hence large number of rounds of iterations), we will assume
such boundary effects are negligible.
SWAP
3
2
Zθ
√
SWAP
Zπ
2
Z−θ Z−π
2
Gate counts: G1q,t = 2, G2q,t = 2
Time needed: τt = τ1q + 4τ2q
• Fermionic swap:
Fsw = 1
2 (XX + Y Y + ZI + IZ) = SWAP · CZ
SWAP
3
2
Zπ
√
SWAP
Zπ
2
Z−π
2
Gate counts: G1q,F = 1, G2q,F = 2
Time needed: τf = 2τ1q + 4τ2q
• Fermionic swap + on-site repulsion: FswUU
SWAP 2θ
SWAP
3
2
Z−2θ+π
√
SWAP
Zπ
2
Z−π
2
Gate counts: G1q,FU = 3, G2q,FU = 3.
Time needed: τFU = 6τ1q + 6τ2q
• Fermionic swap + hopping interaction: FswUt
SWAP
3
2
Zθ+π
√
SWAP
Zπ
2
Z−θ Z−π
2
Gate counts: G1q,Ft = 2, G2q,Ft = 2
Time needed: τFt = 3τ1q + 4τ2q
Following the above gate decomposition and the Hamil-
tonian ansatz circuit outlined in Appendix A1, we can
obtain the following estimates for the total number of
one-qubit gates needed N1q (all are Z rotations), total
number of two-qubit gates needed N2q (all are partial
swaps) and the total length of time needed T to perform
one block of Hamiltonian ansatz for 2D Hubbard model15
of V sites using basic single-qubit rotation and partial
swaps:
N1q = 4V
3
2 + 7V − 4
√
V
N2q = 8V
3
2 + V − 4
√
V
T =

8
√
V + 5

τ1q +

16
√
V + 2

τ2q
For V = 25, we have:
N1q ≈ 650
N2q ≈ 1000
T ≈ 45τ1q + 80τ2q
Appendix B: Slater Determinant Preparation
Here we recap the Slater determinant preparation
scheme outlined in [12, 22]. Note that the input Slater
determinant we choose to prepare in this Article will fol-
low the same spin and site-layout symmetry as the output
ground state since the ansatz we choose preserves these
two symmetries.
1. Background
We will use Norb to denote the total number of orbitals
that we are considering while Ne will be the number of
electrons (i.e. the number of occupied orbitals).
We start with the qubits representing the eigenorbitals
of the initial Hamiltonian (e.g. non-interacting Hubbard
Hamiltonian). The initial state is the ground state of the
initial Hamiltonian with the first Ne orbitals being oc-
cupied (i.e. the first Ne qubits are initialised to 1 while
the rest are initialised to 0). Now the role of the state
preparation circuit is to transform our qubits from rep-
resenting the eigenstates of the initial Hamiltonian (with
orbital creation operators {a†
j}) to the orbitals that can
have a compact description of our target Hamiltonian,
i.e. to the site orbital basis (with orbital creation oper-
ators {b†
j}). This basis transformation can be described
by the transformation matrix Q†
(also called the Slater
determinant) of the shape Norb × Ne:
~ b†
= Q†
~ a†
= U†
ΛW~ a†
= U†
Λ~ a0†
Here we have carried out singular value decomposition of
Q†
. W is a rotation within the filled-orbital subspace to
find a new set of basis {a0†
i } other than the eigenstate of
the initial Hamiltonian {a†
i}. The qubit ground state in
basis {a0†
i } is the same as basis {a†
i} with all the orbitals
filled. Hence, we do not need to carry out the transfor-
mation W explicitly, we only need to keep in mind that
now we are working in this new basis for the input state
instead of the initial basis [22]. Λ is a rectangular ma-
trix of the Norb ×Ne with ones at the diagonal and zeros
elsewhere. This is just an isometry to expand our space
from the filled orbital subspace to the full orbital space
by attaching Norb − Ne empty orbitals. Then the trans-
formation U†
on the full orbital space will complete our
transformation of basis. The transformation U†
will be
implemented as compositions of Givens rotations in the
quantum circuit.
2. Givens rotation
A Givens rotation is just a general rotation operation
within a 2D complex subspace. There are two parts to
a Givens rotation, one is the rotation to change the am-
plitude, and the other is phase operator to change the
relative phase between the two basis in the subspace [22]:
G(θ,φ) =

cosθ −sinθ
sinθ cosθ

1 0
0 eiφ

We will be mostly dealing with real Slater determinant,
so let us ignore the phase part here. The rotation part
can be carried out using the operator:
Rij(θ) = e
θ
4 (a†
i aj−a†
jai)
JW transform the neighbouring orbital case, we have

a†
iai+1 −

a†
iai+1
†

= 2iIm
n
a†
iai+1
o
⇒ 2iIm{(X − iY )(X + iY )}
= 2i(XY − Y X)
Hence, the given rotation for adjacent orbitals are:
R(θ) = eiθ
2 (XY −Y X)
= e−iθ
2 (Y X−XY )
which translate into the following circuit using partial
swap and Z rotations.
SWAP
3
2
Z−θ
√
SWAP
Zθ
Using the notation in Appendix A2, we have:
Gate counts: G1q,G = 2, G2q,G = 2
Time needed: τG = τ1q + 4τ2q16
3. Gate count for Givens rotation
a. Simple scheme
The transformation from the initial eigenbasis {a†
i} to
the target eigenbasis {b†
i} can be viewed as a process of
trying to diagonalise the transformation matrix (Slater
determinant) Q. The transformation W can zero out
a triangle of entries along the Ne dimension. We need
one Givens rotation to zero out each remaining non-zero
off-diagonal elements. The number of Givens rotation
needed is [22]:
Ne (Norb − Ne)
For the half-filling Hubbard model with V sites, we have
Norb = 2V and Ne = V . Hence, we have V 2
off-diagonal
elements to be zeroed out. Each Givens rotation is de-
composed into two partial-swaps and two Z rotations,
thus the number of gates we needed are (following the
notation in Appendix A2)
N1q = 2V 2
N2q = 2V 2
Using the parallel scheme suggested in [12], we have a
circuit of depth
(Norb − 1 − (Ne − 1)) + (Ne − 1) = Norb − 1 = 2V − 1
which translate into the circuit runtime of
T = (2V − 1)(τ1q + 4τ2q)
For V = 25, we have:
N1q = 1250
N2q = 1250
T = 49τ1q + 196τ2q
b. Using spin conservation
For the Hubbard Hamiltonian that we are consider-
ing, the two spin spaces are decoupled. Hence, we can
consider the Slater determinants of the two spin subspace
separately, each of the shape Ne
2 × Norb
2 . Hence, the num-
ber of Givens rotation needed in each spin subspace is
Ne
2

Norb
2
−
Ne
2

=
V 2
4
.
To keep the applications of the Givens rotations within
the spin subspace on only adjacent orbitals, we need to
start in an orbital ordering with the first Norb/2 being the
spin-up orbitals and the next Norb/2 being the spin-down
orbitals. Hence, we need to carry out orbital rearrange-
ment after the Givens rotations to restore the spin-orbital
ordering for the Hamiltonian ansatz (Appendix A1).
We can arrange the Givens rotations such that all the
Givens rotation on the last spin-up orbital (the Norb
2 th
orbital) and the first spin-down orbital (the Norb
2 + 1th
orbital) finished first. In the next time step, while we are
carrying out other Givens rotations, we can start per-
forming fSWAP on the two orbitals that have finished
Givens rotation. In the next step, two more orbitals
will finish their Givens rotation (orbitals Norb
2 − 1 and
Norb
2 + 2), thus now we can perform fSWAP on orbitals
(Norb
2 − 1, Norb
2 ) and (Norb
2 + 1, Norb
2 + 2). Carry on we
will have more and more orbitals finishing their Givens
rotations, and in each time step we will perform fSWAP
on all orbitals that finished Givens rotations, alternating
between the odd pair of orbitals and even pair of orbitals.
After Norb
2 −2 layer of swap, we will have alternating up
and down orbitals. One more layer of swaps between all
orbitals 4n − 1 and 4n, will give us the ↑↓↓↑↑ ··· order
we used in the Hamiltonian ansatz (Appendix A1). Note
here we only talk about how to arrange the orbitals to
have the right spin ordering, for the ordering of the or-
bitals within the same spin, it is determined by order of
the rows and columns of the Slater determinants that we
wrote down. In total, we need
(Norb
2 − 2 + 1) Norb
2 − 2

2
+ b
Norb
4
c
≈
N2
orb
8
−
Norb
2
=
V 2
2
− V
fSWAPs to achieve the desired orbital order.
For the fSWAP gates, similar to Appendix A2, we can
arrange the gates such that the
√
Z only acts on the odd
orbitals, which will enable the cancellation of all the
√
Z
other than those at the boundary. Hence, we can ignore
the
√
Z gates required by the fSWAPs. Our scheme need
V 2
4 ×2 Givens rotations and V 2
2 −V fSWAPs. When de-
composed into partial swap and Z rotation, the number
of one-qubit gates and two-qubit gates needed are
N1q = 2

V 2
2

+
V 2
2
− V =
3
2
V 2
− V
N2q = 2

V 2
2

+ 2

V 2
2
− V

= 2V 2
− 2V
The depth of the circuit before finishing the first
Givens rotation is Norb − Ne = V . This section of the
circuit consist of only Givens rotation, hence require run-
time:
Ta = V (τ1q + 4τ2q)
After this, we have the fSWAP network with Givens rota-
tion happening concurrently, the depth of the circuit here
is V −1, the runtime is limited by the fSWAP instead of17
Givens rotation since fSWAP contains π-rotations of Z.
Hence, the runtime needed for the fSWAP networks is:
Tb = (V − 1)(2τ1q + 4τ2q)
Hence, the total runtime needed for the state preparation
circuit is:
T = Ta + Tb = (3V − 2)τ1q + (8V − 4)τ2q
For V = 25, we have:
N1q = 910
N2q = 1250
T = 73τ1q + 196τ2q
Hence, the spin subspace scheme leads to some reduction
in the number of one-qubit gate. However, it also leads
to longer circuit runtime.
c. Comparison to Ansatz circuit
When compared to Appendix A2, the number of one-
qubit gates of the Slater determinant preparation circuit
is twice of that of one layer of the Hamiltonian ansatz,
the number of two-qubit gates and the runtime are com-
parable.
Do note that the number of gates of the Slater determi-
nant preparation circuit scale as O(V 2
), which is worse
than the V 3/2
ansatz scaling. The depth of the Slater de-
terminant preparation circuit scale as O(V ), which is also
worse than the ansatz scaling O(
√
V ) as well. However,
we need to note that we did not take into account of the
number of blocks of Hamiltonian ansatz might be needed
in the ansatz scaling, and the number of blocks needed
is very likely to scale worse than
√
V , which means that
the state preparation should have a better scaling than
the ansatz if we take that into account.
Appendix C: Gate Count Analysis for
Superconducting Qubits
Now we will follow the same analysis in Appendix A
and Appendix B, but switch to superconducting qubits.
In superconducting qubits, we will use partial iSWAP [62]
instead of partial SWAP as our elementary two-qubit
gate. The differences between the two are discussed in
Ref. [63]
Note that partial iSWAP is not e−iθ
2 i SWAP
, instead it
is just a gate based on XY interaction:
iSWAPθ := e−iθ
2 (XX+Y Y )
iSWAP := iSWAP−π/2.
In our circuit, partial iSWAP will be the only type of two-
qubit gate we use. This would enable us to implement
all Z rotations in a virtual way since the iSWAP can
be easily transformed to implement virtual Z gate [64].
Thus in the following gate count section we will omit all
Z rotations in our gate counts and time counts.
In the following section, we will use the below notations
for the time units of the gates:
• τ1q: the time unit for a single-qubit gate, which is
the time needed to perform a π
2 rotation. We will
assume the time needed to carry out a single-qubit
gate with a variable parameter, i.e. gates like Xθ,
is on average τ1q.
• τ2q: the time unit for a two-qubit gate, which is the
time needed to perform a iSWAP. We will assume
the time needed to carry out a partial swap with
a variable parameter, i.e. gates like iSWAPθ, is on
average τ2q.
The decompositions of the gates in the ansatz into par-
tial iSWAPs and single-qubit rotations and their resource
estimates are shown below:
• On-site repulsion: UU(θ) = e−iθ
2 (I−Z1)(I−Z2)
Zπ−θ
i SWAP
i SWAP
Xθ+π
i SWAP
i SWAP
Zπ−θ Xπ
2
Xπ
2
Gate counts: G1q,U = 3, G2q,U = 4.
Time needed: τU = 5τ1q + 4τ2q
• Hopping interaction: Ut(θ) = e−iθ
2 (XX+Y Y )
=
iSWAPθ
Gate counts: G1q,t = 0, G2q,t = 1
Time needed: τt = τ2q
• Fermionic swap:
Fsw = 1
2 (XX + Y Y + ZI + IZ)
i SWAP
Z−π
2
Z−π
2
Gate counts: G1q,F = 0, G2q,F = 1
Time needed: τf = τ2q
• Fermionic swap + on-site repulsion: FswUU
Using the fact that iSWAP commute with Zθ ⊗Zθ
and iSWAP · iSWAP = Z ⊗ Z, we have:18
Z−π
2 −θ
i SWAP
Xθ+π
i SWAP
i SWAP
Z−π
2 −θ Xπ
2
Xπ
2
Gate counts: G1q,FU = 3, G2q,FU = 3.
Time needed: τFU = 5τ1q + 3τ2q
• Fermionic swap + hopping interaction: FswUt
i SWAP θ− π
2
Z−π
2
Z−π
2
Gate counts: G1q,Ft = 0, G2q,Ft = 1
Time needed: τFt = 2τ2q
Following the above gate decomposition and the Hamil-
tonian ansatz circuit outlined in Appendix A, we can
obtain the following estimates for the total number of
one-qubit gates needed N1q,antz (all are X rotations), to-
tal number of two-qubit gates needed N2q,antz (all are
partial swaps) and the total length of time needed Tantz
to perform one block of Hamiltonian ansatz for 2D Hub-
bard model of V sites using basic single-qubit rotation
and partial iSWAPs:
N1q,antz = 3V
N2q,antz = 4V
3
2 + 2V − 2
√
V
Tantz = 5τ1q + 4
√
V + 1

τ2q
For V = 25, we have:
N1q,antz ≈ 75
N2q,antz ≈ 540
Tantz ≈ 5τ(1)
+ 24τ(2)
Now we will turn to initial Slater determinant prepa-
ration outlined in Appendix B. The gate needed is Given
rotation, which can be decomposed as
• Givens rotation: R(θ) = e−iθ
2 (Y X−XY )
i SWAP θ
Zπ
2
Z−π
2
Gate counts: G1q,G = 0, G2q,G = 1
Time needed: τG = τ2q.
Following the same arguments in Appendix B3, the num-
ber of two-qubit gates and one-qubit gates needed for
Slater determinant preparation is:
N1q,prep = V 2
N2q,prep = V 2
.
The depth of the Slater determinant preparation circuit
is
D = 2V − 1
which translate into the circuit runtime of
Tprep = (2V − 1)τ2q.
Together we can obtain the resource estimate for the
full ansatz circuit with Nblk ansatz blocks:
N1q = V 2
+ 3V Nblk
N2q = V 2
+

4V
3
2 + 2V − 2
√
V

Nblk
T = (2V − 1)τ2q +

5τ1q + 4
√
V + 1

τ2q

Nblk
For V = Nblk = 25, we have:
N1q ≈ 2500
N2q ≈ 14000
T ≈ 125τ1q + 650τ2q.
Appendix D: Obtaining Energy Gradient in
Quantum Computers
1. Background
As mentioned in Section II. For a given Hamilto-
nian H, we want to find the set of optimal parame-
ters ~ θ for an ansatz circuit such that the state ψ(~ θ)
E
it produce is as close to the ground state of the Hamil-
tonian as possible, i.e. we want to find ~ θ such that
Etot(~ θ) =
D
ψ(~ θ) H ψ(~ θ)
E
is minimised.
However, since the energy Etot(~ θ) cannot be directly
measured, we need to rewrite our Hamiltonian in terms
of its Pauli components:
H =
X
j
λjGj
D
ψ(~ θ) H ψ(~ θ)
E
=
X
j
λj
D
ψ(~ θ) Gj ψ(~ θ)
E
.
Hence,
Etot(~ θ) =
X
j
λjEi(~ θ)19
where Ej(~ θ) =
D
ψ(~ θ) Gj ψ(~ θ)
E
, which is just the expec-
tation value of a Pauli observable, hence can be directly
obtained from the circuit.
To find the ground state, we can use gradient-based
optimisation methods like gradient decent and L-BFGS-
B, etc. This require us to obtain ∂Etot(~ θ)
∂θm
, which in turns
means that we need to measure
∂Ej(~ θ)
∂θm
for every Hamil-
tonian component j and every parameter m.
We can obtain
∂Ej(~ θ)
∂θm
simply using finite difference,
in which we will measure Ej(θ1,θ2,···θm,···) and
Ej(θ1,θ2,···θm + δθm,···), and take their difference di-
vided by δθm to approximate the gradient.
2. The circuit approach to obtain gradients
The exact gradient
∂Ej(~ θ)
∂θm
can be obtained using cir-
cuit measurement instead of using finite difference ap-
proximation. Suppose our ansatz circuit consist of
parametrised rotation gates Rn of the form
Rn(θn) = e−iθnFn
where Fn are both Hermitian and unitary, e.g. Pauli or
swaps.
Then our parametrised circuit can be written as:
ψ(~ θ)
E
=
1 Y
n=N
Rn(θn)|0i = R(~ θ)|0i
where we have denote the whole circuit using R(~ θ).
A string of parametrised rotation can be denoted as:
b Y
n=a
Rn(θn) = Ra:b
which means that R(~ θ) = RN:1
Hence,
∂R(~ θ)
∂θm
= RN:m+1
∂Rm(θm)
∂θm
Rm−1:1
= −iRN:m+1FmRm:1
Hence we have
∂Ej(~ θ)
∂θm
= 2Re
nD
ψ(~ θ) Gj

∂m ψ(~ θ)
Eo
= 2Re
n
0 R†
(~ θ)Gj

∂mR(~ θ)

0
o
= 2Im
n
0 (RN:1)
†
GjRN:m+1FmRm:1 0
o
This can be measured via two kind of circuits:
• Indirect measurement [28]:
The circuit is shown in Fig. 4 (a) will measure
1
2
∂Ej(~ θ)
∂θm
. Here we use an ancilla which probes the
main ansatz with a control unitary. The advantage
of such a scheme is that we can obtain the exact
gradient of the circuit via measurement of only one
qubit. However, it requires an extra ancilla qubit.
The need for performing the control unitary be-
tween the ancilla and any other qubits also lead to
connectivity challenges. Control unitaries like con-
trol swap are also not straightforward to implement
in lots of architectures.
• Direct measurement [74]:
The circuit is shown in Fig. 4 (b). Denoting |φi =
Rm:1 0 , W = RN:m+1, the circuit will measure:
Ajm,± = hφ|e±iπ
4 Fm
W†
GjWe∓iπ
4 Fm
|φi
=
1
2
hφ|(1 ± iFm)W†
GjW (1 ∓ iFm)|φi
=
1
2
hφ|W†
GjW |φi +
1
2
hφ|FmW†
GjWFm |φi
± i
1
2
hφ|FmW†
GjW |φi − hφ|W†
GjWFm |φi

Hence, the gradient
∂Ej(~ θ)
∂θm
can be obtained via
Ajm,+ − Ajm,−
= i hφ|FmW†
GjW |φi − hφ|W†
GjWFm |φi

= 2Im

hφ|W†
GjWFm |φi
=
∂Ej(~ θ)
∂θm
For this method, we do not require any extra ancilla
or control unitaries. However, we need to measure
two expectation values Ajm,+ and Ajm,− for the
estimation of the gradient
∂Ej(~ θ)
∂θm
instead of one in
the case of indirect measurement.
3. Shared parameters
For the case where there are parametrised gates with
shared parameters, we can still obtain the gradients using
finite difference in a similar way.
When using gradient circuits, the story is more com-
plicated. Firstly, we add a scaling factor βm to each
parameters: θm → βmθm:
∂R({θn})
∂θm
= −iRN:m+1FmRm:1
⇒
∂R({βnθn})
∂βmθm
= −iRN:m+1FmRm:1
∂R({βnθn})
∂θm
= −iβmRN:m+1FmRm:120
··· ··· X
··· ··· Gj
1 √
2
(|0i − i|1i)
|0i
⊗n
R1 R2 Fm Rm RN
(a)
··· ··· Gj |0i
⊗n
R1 R2 e±iπ
4 Fm Rm RN
(b)
FIG. 4. These are the circuits used to measure the gradient
∂Ej(~ θ)
∂θm
using (a) indirect measurements, (b) direct measure-
ments. Here Ej(~ θ) =
D
ψ(~ θ) Gj ψ(~ θ)
E
is the expectation
value of the jth component of the Hamiltonian. θm is the pa-
rameter of the mth parametrised gate Rm(θm) = e−iθmFm
of
the ansatz circuit, where Fm is both Hermitian and unitary.
Note that here we have assumed that all parametrised gates
have independent parameters.
Now we change the labelling of the parametrised gates:
m → m,v, for which gates with the same m will share the
same parameters, and v labels the different parametrised
gates that share the same parameter:
θm,v = θm ∀v
In such case, we have
∂R({βn,wθn,w})
∂θm
=
X
v

∂R({βn,wθn,w})
∂θm,v

θm,v=θm∀v
i.e. the gradient w.r.t. to a given parameter θm is
the sum of all the gradient w.r.t. the parameter of
each parametrised gate that shared the parameter value.
Hence, when trying to obtain the gradient using circuit
measurements, we still need to treat the parameters in
each gate as independent, and then sum those gradient
up based on which gates have shared parameters.
Appendix E: Number of Samples Needed for Energy
and Energy Gradient
1. Number of samples in finite difference
a. Gradient precision
The equation for the estimation of the gradient of the
jth
Pauli term in the Hamiltonian using finite difference
is:
∂Ej(~ θ)
∂θm
=
Ej(~ θ +
~ δm
2 ) − Ej(~ θ −
~ δm
2 )
δ
(E1)
where ~ δm is a vector with the mth
parameter set to δ and
all other parameters set to 0. Ej denote the sampling
average of Ej.
Hence, we have
Var[∂mEj] =
2
δ2
Var

Ej

(E2)
i.e. for larger δ, we can achieve smaller variance in gra-
dient for a fixed variance in energy. However, we cannot
increase δ indefinitely because there is an error associ-
ated with the finite step size when using finite difference,
which has the magnitude of:
δ2
24
Nsh X
u,v,w=1
∂3
Ej(~ θ)
∂θm,v∂θm,u∂θm,w
≈ N3
sh
δ2
24
∂3
mEj
where number of parametrised gates share parameter θm
is Nsh. The sum over v,u,w are the sum over all the
parametrised gates that share the same parameter θm as
discussed in Appendix D3. We have made the assump-
tion that all third-order derivatives in the sum have sim-
ilar magnitudes and the same sign. Note that the finite
step size error increases with δ.
A balance between the two errors can be achieved when
we choose the step size δ to satisfy
r
2
δ2
Var

Ej

= N3
sh
δ2
24
∂3
mEj
δ =


24
q
2Var

Ej

N3
sh∂3
mEj


1
3
Note that
∂3
Ej(~ θ)
∂θ3
m
= 2Re
nD
ψ(~ θ) Gj

∂3
m ψ(~ θ)
Eo
+ 6Re
n
∂m
D
ψ(~ θ)

Gj

∂2
m ψ(~ θ)
Eo
where Re
n
∂m
D
ψ(~ θ)

Gj

∂2
m ψ(~ θ)
Eo
and
Re
nD
ψ(~ θ) Gj

∂3
m ψ(~ θ)
Eo
can be measured us-
ing circuit similar to the first order derivative in
Appendix D2. Hence, the magnitude of
∂3
Ej(~ θ)
∂θ3
m
is
around
√
22 + 62 ≈ 6.
Thus we have:
δ =


24
q
2Var

Ej

6N3
sh


1
3
=
1.78
Nsh
Var

Ej
1
6
Substituting into Eq. (E2), we have:
Var[∂mEj] = 0.63N2
shVar

Ej
2
3
Var

Ej

=
2
N3
sh
Var[∂mEj]
3
2
(E3)
This is the smallest variance in the gradient that we can
achieve for a given variance in the energy estimation by
choosing the optimal step size δ.21
b. Number of samples needed
Assuming Var[Ej] ∼ O(1), then the number of sam-
ples needed to achieve the sample average variance
Var

Ej

is
Var[Ej]
Var

Ej
 ∼
1
Var

Ej

Since we need to evaluate sample average Ej at two
points in finite difference, the total number of samples
needed is:
Mfd ∼
2
Var

Ej
 =
N3
sh
Var[∂mEj]
3
2
(E4)
2. Number of samples in direct measurement
a. Gradient precision
The equation of estimation of the gradient of a the jth
Pauli term in the Hamiltonian using direct measurement
is:
∂Ej(~ θ)
∂θm
=
Nsh X
v=1
"
∂Ej(~ θ)
∂θm,v
#
θm,v=θm∀v
=
Nsh X
v=1
Ajmv,+ − Ajmv,−

Here the sum over v is the sum over all the parametrised
gates that share the same parameter θm as discussed in
Appendix D3.
Hence, we have:
Var[∂mEj] = 2NshVar

A

b. Number of samples needed
Assuming Var[A] ∼ O(1), then the number of samples
needed to achieve sample average variance Var

A

is
Var[A]
Var

A
 ∼
1
Var

A

Since we need to evaluate sample average A at 2Nsh
points in direct measurement, the total number of sam-
ples needed is:
Mdm ∼
2Nsh
Var

A
 =
(2Nsh)
2
Var[∂mEj]
(E5)
When compared to Eq. (E4) of finite difference, we can
see that direct measurement has better scaling in terms
of both the number of shared of parameters Nsh and
the target gradient precision Var[∂mEj], thus direct mea-
surement is preferred.
3. Comparison between finite difference and direct
measurement
To compare the two methods, we use Eq. (E4) and
Eq. (E5) to study
Mdm
Mfd
=
4
p
Var[∂mEj]
Nsh
If we define the breaking point of the gradient precision
as:
∗
grad =
Nsh
4
(E6)
then we have:
•
p
Var[∂mEj] ≥ ∗
grad ⇒ Mdm
Mfd
≥ 1:
Finite difference need less samples to achieve the
given precision.
•
p
Var[∂mEj] < ∗
grad ⇒ Mdm
Mfd
< 1:
Direct measurement need less samples to achieve
the given precision.
Nsh = 4Neq for hopping term (if we assume spin sym-
metry) and Nsh = 3Neq for repulsion term where Neq is
the number of equivalent partition in the site layout due
to symmetry. Here we will take the approximation that
all Nsh = 4Neq since there are more hopping term than
repulsion terms. Thus we have:
Var[∂mEj] = 8NeqVar

A

(E7)
Using the parametrisation discuss in Section VA, for
open boundary Hubbard model the breaking point of the
gradient precision ∗
grad is:
• Square site layout:
Neq = 8 ⇒ ∗
grad,sq = 2.5 × 10−4
• Rectangular site layout:
Neq = 4 ⇒ ∗
grad,rt = 1 × 10−3
4. Number of samples needed for energy
As discussed in [34], to compete with the best classical
algorithm we need to estimate the energy per site Esite
to 10−3
t precision.
We can decompose the total energy into its subterms
Ej:
Etot ≈
J X
j=1
hjEj
here hj is the coefficient of the Pauli decomposition of
the Hamiltonian H =
PJ
j=1 hjGj.22
The repulsion terms and hopping terms in the Hamil-
tonian can be decomposed into their Pauli components:
Erep =
1
4
+
3 X
j=1
1
4
Ej
Ehop =
2 X
j=1
1
2
Ej
Hence, the variance in their sampling average are:
Var

Erep

=
3
42
Var

Ej

Var

Ehop

=
1
2
Var

Ej

There are V repulsion terms and 4V hopping terms,
hence the total energy is:
V X
k=1
Erep,k +
4V X
k=1
Ehop,k = V Esite
which translate into the following equation for variance:
V Var

Erep

+ 4V Var

Ehop

= V 2
Var

Esite

Var

Ej

=
16
35
V Var

Esite

As mentioned above, we want to achieve Var

Esite

=
10−3
t
2
, assuming t ∼ O(1), we have:
Var

Ej

=
16
35
V × 10−6
(E8)
Assuming Var[Ej] ∼ O(1), then the number of sam-
ples needed to achieve sample average variance Var

Ej

is
MEj ∼
Var[Ej]
Var

Ej
 ∼
1
Var

Ej
 =
35
16V
× 106
.
As mentioned in Section VB, we need 5 circuit runs to
evaluate all energy subterms. Thus, the total number of
circuit runs needed to evaluate the energy to the required
precision is:
ME = 5MEj =
1.1 × 107
V
Thus for V = 25, we have:
ME ≈ 4 × 105
5. Number of samples needed for energy gradients
First we need to decide what precision of the energy
gradient is needed. In Appendix E4, we have obtained
the precision of the energy subterms that we want to
achieve. If we are using finite difference method, in order
to achieve such a precision in the final result energy sub-
terms, we can evaluate the energy points in the gradient
estimation to the same precision, and our terminating
threshold of change in the estimated energy subterms
can be set to the same precision. In such case, the gradi-
ent precision that we can achieve can be obtained using
Eq. (E3) and Eq. (E8):
Var[∂mEj] = 0.63N2
shVar

Ej
2
3
= 3.7N2
shV
2
3 × 10−5
(E9)
To achieve the same precision using direct measurement,
the number of sample needed can be obtained by substi-
tuting this into Eq. (E5):
Mdm ≈
(2Nsh)
2
Var[∂mEj]
= 1.1V −2
3 × 105
. (E10)
Note that this is just the number of samples needed to
obtain the gradient of an energy subterm w.r.t. one pa-
rameters. To obtain the full gradient vector, we need to
iterate over all parameters. Using Eq. (16), the number
of circuit runs needed to evaluate
∂Ej(~ θ)
∂θm
for all parame-
ters m using direct measurement is
Mgrad,j = MdmNpara
≈
1.1Nsite
paraNblkV
1
3
Neq
× 105
As mentioned in Section VB, we need 5 circuit runs to
measure all energy subterms. Thus, the total number of
circuit runs needed to evaluate the energy gradient vector
to the required precision is:
Mgrad = 5Mgrad,j =
5.5Nsite
paraNblkV
1
3
Neq
× 105
For 5 × 5 Hubbard model, we have V = 25, Neq = 8
and Nsite
para = 5. Assuming Nblk = V , the number of
circuit runs needed is:
Mgrad ≈ 2.5 × 107
Appendix F: Quantum Dot Layout
Fig. 5, Fig. 6 shows how we can perform the non-
demolishing measurements required by our problem us-
ing three lines of quantum dot, one line for data and two
lines for ancilla. The ancilla here come in the form of
double dot, which will be initialised in singlet and will
be readout using Pauli spin blockade which enable us to
distinguish singlet and triplet state. Fig. 5 shows how
we can measure XX and Y Y of the hopping terms. Af-
ter that, we can compose XX and Y Y to obtain ZZ
(with an additional − sign) which in terms can give us23
electron number parity for symmetry verification. Alter-
natively we can also measure XX and ZZ, and obtain
Y Y via post-processing since control-Z gate can be eas-
ier to implement in silicon qubits. Fig. 5 shows how we
perform Z-measurement for every data dots to obtain
the repulsion terms. The electron number parity in sym-
metry verification can again be obtained via composing
our measurement results. Our measurement can also be
carried out using only one row of ancilla. In such a case,
we essentially using one row of ancilla to carry out two
rounds of measurements with ancilla reinitialisation in
between. Other architectures that incorporating spin-to-
charge readout using reservoirs are also possible.
1↑ 1↓ 2↓ 3↓ 3↑ 2↑ 4↓ 4↑ 5↑
. . .
. . .
. . .
: Ancilla double dots : Data dots : Gates between dots
FIG. 5. The measurements of the hopping terms. The blue
interaction here are control-X gate from the ancilla to the
data for the measurement of XX in the hopping term. The
red interaction here are control-Y gate from the ancilla to the
data for the measurement of Y Y in the hopping term.
1↑ 1↓ 2↓ 3↓ 3↑ 2↑ 4↓ 4↑ 5↑
. . .
. . .
: Ancilla double dots : Data dots : Gates between dots
. . .
FIG. 6. The measurements of the repulsion terms. All the
interaction here are control-Z gates. One row of ancilla is
in charge of Z measurements of the odd data dots while the
other row of ancilla is in charge of Z measurements of the
even data dots.
[1] Richard P. Feynman, “Simulating physics with comput-
ers,” International Journal of Theoretical Physics 21,
467–488 (1982).
[2] Ian D. Kivlichan, Craig Gidney, Dominic W. Berry,
Nathan Wiebe, Jarrod McClean, Wei Sun, Zhang Jiang,
Nicholas Rubin, Austin Fowler, Alán Aspuru-Guzik,
Ryan Babbush, and Hartmut Neven, “Improved Fault-
Tolerant Quantum Simulation of Condensed-Phase Cor-
related Electrons via Trotterization,” arXiv:1902.10673
[physics, physics:quant-ph] (2019).
[3] Dave Wecker, Matthew B. Hastings, and Matthias
Troyer, “Progress towards practical quantum varia-
tional algorithms,” Physical Review A 92 (2015),
10.1103/PhysRevA.92.042303.
[4] L. M. K. Vandersypen, H. Bluhm, J. S. Clarke, A. S. Dzu-
rak, R. Ishihara, A. Morello, D. J. Reilly, L. R. Schreiber,
and M. Veldhorst, “Interfacing spin qubits in quantum
dots and donors—hot, dense, and coherent,” npj Quan-
tum Information 3 (2017), 10.1038/s41534-017-0038-y.
[5] Morten Kjaergaard, Mollie E. Schwartz, Jochen
Braumüller, Philip Krantz, Joel I.-J. Wang, Simon Gus-
tavsson, and William D. Oliver, “Superconducting
Qubits: Current State of Play,” Annual Review of Con-
densed Matter Physics 11, 369–395 (2020).
[6] Sam McArdle, Suguru Endo, Alán Aspuru-Guzik, Si-
mon C. Benjamin, and Xiao Yuan, “Quantum computa-
tional chemistry,” Reviews of Modern Physics 92, 015003
(2020).
[7] Yudong Cao, Jonathan Romero, Jonathan P. Olson,
Matthias Degroote, Peter D. Johnson, Mária Kieferová,
Ian D. Kivlichan, Tim Menke, Borja Peropadre, Nico-
las P. D. Sawaya, Sukin Sim, Libor Veis, and Alán
Aspuru-Guzik, “Quantum Chemistry in the Age of Quan-
tum Computing,” Chemical Reviews 119, 10856–10915
(2019).
[8] Abhinav Kandala, Antonio Mezzacapo, Kristan Temme,
Maika Takita, Markus Brink, Jerry M. Chow, and
Jay M. Gambetta, “Hardware-efficient variational quan-
tum eigensolver for small molecules and quantum mag-
nets,” Nature 549, 242–246 (2017).
[9] Jonathan Romero, Ryan Babbush, Jarrod R. McClean,
Cornelius Hempel, Peter J. Love, and Alán Aspuru-
Guzik, “Strategies for quantum computing molecular en-
ergies using the unitary coupled cluster ansatz,” Quan-
tum Science and Technology 4, 014008 (2018).
[10] Pierre-Luc Dallaire-Demers, Jonathan Romero, Libor
Veis, Sukin Sim, and Alán Aspuru-Guzik, “Low-depth
circuit ansatz for preparing correlated fermionic states on
a quantum computer,” Quantum Science and Technology
4, 045005 (2019).
[11] Ryan Babbush, Nathan Wiebe, Jarrod McClean, James
McClain, Hartmut Neven, and Garnet Kin-Lic Chan,
“Low-Depth Quantum Simulation of Materials,” Physi-
cal Review X 8, 011044 (2018).24
[12] Ian D. Kivlichan, Jarrod McClean, Nathan Wiebe,
Craig Gidney, Alán Aspuru-Guzik, Garnet Kin-Lic Chan,
and Ryan Babbush, “Quantum Simulation of Electronic
Structure with Linear Depth and Connectivity,” Physical
Review Letters 120, 110501 (2018).
[13] F Verstraete and J I Cirac, “Mapping local Hamiltoni-
ans of fermions to local Hamiltonians of spins,” Journal
of Statistical Mechanics: Theory and Experiment 2005,
P09012–P09012 (2005).
[14] Sergey Bravyi and Alexei Kitaev, “Fermionic quantum
computation,” Annals of Physics 298, 210–226 (2002).
[15] Jan-Michael Reiner, Frank Wilhelm-Mauch, Gerd Schön,
and Michael Marthaler, “Finding the ground state of the
Hubbard model by variational methods on a quantum
computer with gate errors,” Quantum Science and Tech-
nology 4, 035005 (2019).
[16] Chris Cade, Lana Mineh, Ashley Montanaro, and
Stasja Stanisic, “Strategies for solving the Fermi-
Hubbard model on near-term quantum computers,”
arXiv:1912.06007 [quant-ph] (2019).
[17] Simons Collaboration on the Many-Electron Problem,
J. P. F. LeBlanc, Andrey E. Antipov, Federico Becca,
Ireneusz W. Bulik, Garnet Kin-Lic Chan, Chia-Min
Chung, Youjin Deng, Michel Ferrero, Thomas M. Hen-
derson, Carlos A. Jiménez-Hoyos, E. Kozik, Xuan-Wen
Liu, Andrew J. Millis, N. V. Prokof’ev, Mingpu Qin,
Gustavo E. Scuseria, Hao Shi, B. V. Svistunov, Luca F.
Tocchio, I. S. Tupitsyn, Steven R. White, Shiwei Zhang,
Bo-Xiao Zheng, Zhenyue Zhu, and Emanuel Gull, “So-
lutions of the Two-Dimensional Hubbard Model: Bench-
marks and Results from a Wide Range of Numerical Al-
gorithms,” Physical Review X 5, 041041 (2015).
[18] Dave Wecker, Matthew B. Hastings, Nathan Wiebe,
Bryan K. Clark, Chetan Nayak, and Matthias Troyer,
“Solving strongly correlated electron models on a quan-
tum computer,” Physical Review A 92, 062318 (2015).
[19] Edward Farhi, Jeffrey Goldstone, and Sam Gutmann,
“A Quantum Approximate Optimization Algorithm,”
arXiv:1411.4028 [quant-ph] (2014).
[20] Edward Farhi and Aram W. Harrow, “Quantum
Supremacy through the Quantum Approximate Op-
timization Algorithm,” arXiv:1602.07674 [quant-ph]
(2016).
[21] Frank Verstraete, J. Ignacio Cirac, and José I. Latorre,
“Quantum circuits for strongly correlated quantum sys-
tems,” Physical Review A 79, 032316 (2009).
[22] Zhang Jiang, Kevin J. Sung, Kostyantyn Kechedzhi,
Vadim N. Smelyanskiy, and Sergio Boixo, “Quantum Al-
gorithms to Simulate Many-Body Physics of Correlated
Fermions,” Physical Review Applied 9, 044036 (2018).
[23] Jarrod R McClean, Jonathan Romero, Ryan Babbush,
and Alán Aspuru-Guzik, “The theory of variational
hybrid quantum-classical algorithms,” New Journal of
Physics 18, 023023 (2016).
[24] P. J. J. O’Malley, R. Babbush, I. D. Kivlichan,
J. Romero, J. R. McClean, R. Barends, J. Kelly,
P. Roushan, A. Tranter, N. Ding, B. Campbell, Y. Chen,
Z. Chen, B. Chiaro, A. Dunsworth, A. G. Fowler, E. Jef-
frey, E. Lucero, A. Megrant, J. Y. Mutus, M. Neeley,
C. Neill, C. Quintana, D. Sank, A. Vainsencher, J. Wen-
ner, T. C. White, P. V. Coveney, P. J. Love, H. Neven,
A. Aspuru-Guzik, and J. M. Martinis, “Scalable Quan-
tum Simulation of Molecular Energies,” Physical Review
X 6, 031007 (2016).
[25] X. Bonet-Monroig, R. Sagastizabal, M. Singh, and T. E.
O’Brien, “Low-cost error mitigation by symmetry verifi-
cation,” Physical Review A 98, 062339 (2018).
[26] Sam McArdle, Xiao Yuan, and Simon Benjamin, “Error-
Mitigated Digital Quantum Simulation,” Physical Re-
view Letters 122, 180501 (2019).
[27] William J. Huggins, Jarrod McClean, Nicholas Rubin,
Zhang Jiang, Nathan Wiebe, K. Birgitta Whaley, and
Ryan Babbush, “Efficient and Noise Resilient Measure-
ments for Quantum Chemistry on Near-Term Quantum
Computers,” arXiv:1907.13117 [physics, physics:quant-
ph] (2019).
[28] Ying Li and Simon C. Benjamin, “Efficient Variational
Quantum Simulator Incorporating Active Error Mini-
mization,” Physical Review X 7 (2017), 10.1103/Phys-
RevX.7.021050.
[29] Kristan Temme, Sergey Bravyi, and Jay M. Gambetta,
“Error Mitigation for Short-Depth Quantum Circuits,”
Physical Review Letters 119, 180509 (2017).
[30] Abhinav Kandala, Kristan Temme, Antonio D. Córcoles,
Antonio Mezzacapo, Jerry M. Chow, and Jay M. Gam-
betta, “Error mitigation extends the computational reach
of a noisy quantum processor,” Nature 567, 491–495
(2019).
[31] Suguru Endo, Simon C. Benjamin, and Ying Li, “Prac-
tical Quantum Error Mitigation for Near-Future Appli-
cations,” Physical Review X 8, 031027 (2018).
[32] Ophelia Crawford, Barnaby van Straaten, Daochen
Wang, Thomas Parks, Earl Campbell, and Stephen
Brierley, “Efficient quantum measurement of Pauli op-
erators,” arXiv:1908.06942 [quant-ph] (2019).
[33] Pranav Gokhale and Frederic T. Chong, “$O(N3̂)$ Mea-
surement Cost for Variational Quantum Eigensolver on
Molecular Hamiltonians,” arXiv:1908.11857 [quant-ph]
(2019).
[34] Philippe Corboz, T. M. Rice, and Matthias Troyer,
“Competing States in the $t$-$J$ Model: Uniform $d$-
Wave State versus Stripe State,” Physical Review Letters
113, 046402 (2014).
[35] Gian Giacomo Guerreschi and Mikhail Smelyanskiy,
“Practical optimization for hybrid quantum-classical al-
gorithms,” arXiv:1701.01450 [quant-ph] (2017).
[36] T. Kolda, R. Lewis, and V. Torczon, “Optimization by
Direct Search: New Perspectives on Some Classical and
Modern Methods,” SIAM Review 45, 385–482 (2003).
[37] Alberto Peruzzo, Jarrod McClean, Peter Shadbolt, Man-
Hong Yung, Xiao-Qi Zhou, Peter J. Love, Alán Aspuru-
Guzik, and Jeremy L. O’Brien, “A variational eigenvalue
solver on a photonic quantum processor,” Nature Com-
munications 5, 4213 (2014).
[38] Yangchao Shen, Xiang Zhang, Shuaining Zhang, Jing-
Ning Zhang, Man-Hong Yung, and Kihwan Kim, “Quan-
tum implementation of the unitary coupled cluster for
simulating molecular electronic structure,” Physical Re-
view A 95, 020501 (2017).
[39] Raffaele Santagati, Jianwei Wang, Antonio A. Gentile,
Stefano Paesani, Nathan Wiebe, Jarrod R. McClean,
Sam Morley-Short, Peter J. Shadbolt, Damien Bonneau,
Joshua W. Silverstone, David P. Tew, Xiaoqi Zhou,
Jeremy L. O’Brien, and Mark G. Thompson, “Witness-
ing eigenstates for quantum simulation of Hamiltonian
spectra,” Science Advances 4, eaap9646 (2018).
[40] J. I. Colless, V. V. Ramasesh, D. Dahlen, M. S. Blok,
M. E. Kimchi-Schwartz, J. R. McClean, J. Carter, W. A.25
de Jong, and I. Siddiqi, “Computation of Molecular
Spectra on a Quantum Processor with an Error-Resilient
Algorithm,” Physical Review X 8, 011021 (2018).
[41] Cornelius Hempel, Christine Maier, Jonathan Romero,
Jarrod McClean, Thomas Monz, Heng Shen, Petar Ju-
rcevic, Ben P. Lanyon, Peter Love, Ryan Babbush,
Alán Aspuru-Guzik, Rainer Blatt, and Christian F.
Roos, “Quantum Chemistry Calculations on a Trapped-
Ion Quantum Simulator,” Physical Review X 8, 031022
(2018).
[42] R. Sagastizabal, X. Bonet-Monroig, M. Singh, M. A.
Rol, C. C. Bultink, X. Fu, C. H. Price, V. P. Os-
troukh, N. Muthusubramanian, A. Bruno, M. Beekman,
N. Haider, T. E. O’Brien, and L. DiCarlo, “Experimen-
tal error mitigation via symmetry verification in a vari-
ational quantum eigensolver,” Physical Review A 100,
010302 (2019).
[43] C. Kokail, C. Maier, R. van Bijnen, T. Brydges, M. K.
Joshi, P. Jurcevic, C. A. Muschik, P. Silvi, R. Blatt, C. F.
Roos, and P. Zoller, “Self-verifying variational quantum
simulation of lattice models,” Nature 569, 355 (2019).
[44] M. Ganzhorn, D.J. Egger, P. Barkoutsos, P. Ollitrault,
G. Salis, N. Moll, M. Roth, A. Fuhrer, P. Mueller, S. Wo-
erner, I. Tavernelli, and S. Filipp, “Gate-Efficient Sim-
ulation of Molecular Eigenstates on a Quantum Com-
puter,” Physical Review Applied 11, 044092 (2019).
[45] Ian Goodfellow, Yoshua Bengio, Aaron Courville, and
Francis Bach, Deep Learning (MIT Press, Cambridge,
Massachusetts, 2017).
[46] Sebastian Ruder, “An overview of gradient descent opti-
mization algorithms,” arXiv:1609.04747 [cs] (2017).
[47] Guillaume Verdon, Michael Broughton, Jarrod R. Mc-
Clean, Kevin J. Sung, Ryan Babbush, Zhang Jiang, Hart-
mut Neven, and Masoud Mohseni, “Learning to learn
with quantum neural networks via classical neural net-
works,” arXiv:1907.05415 [quant-ph] (2019).
[48] Max Wilson, Sam Stromswold, Filip Wudarski, Stu-
art Hadfield, Norm M. Tubman, and Eleanor Rief-
fel, “Optimizing quantum heuristics with meta-learning,”
arXiv:1908.03185 [quant-ph] (2019).
[49] Ken M. Nakanishi, Keisuke Fujii, and Synge
Todo, “Sequential minimal optimization for quantum-
classical hybrid algorithms,” arXiv:1903.12166 [physics,
physics:quant-ph] (2019).
[50] J. C. C. Hwang, C. H. Yang, M. Veldhorst, N. Hendrickx,
M. A. Fogarty, W. Huang, F. E. Hudson, A. Morello, and
A. S. Dzurak, “Impact of $g$-factors and valleys on spin
qubits in a silicon double quantum dot,” Physical Review
B 96, 045302 (2017).
[51] J. R. Petta, A. C. Johnson, J. M. Taylor, E. A. Laird,
A. Yacoby, M. D. Lukin, C. M. Marcus, M. P. Hanson,
and A. C. Gossard, “Coherent Manipulation of Coupled
Electron Spins in Semiconductor Quantum Dots,” Sci-
ence 309, 2180–2184 (2005).
[52] K. C. Nowack, M. Shafiei, M. Laforest, G. E.
D. K. Prawiroatmodjo, L. R. Schreiber, C. Reichl,
W. Wegscheider, and L. M. K. Vandersypen, “Single-
Shot Correlations and Two-Qubit Gate of Solid-State
Spins,” Science 333, 1269–1272 (2011).
[53] Guoji Zheng, Nodar Samkharadze, Marc L. Noordam,
Nima Kalhor, Delphine Brousse, Amir Sammak, Gior-
dano Scappucci, and Lieven M. K. Vandersypen, “Rapid
gate-based spin read-out in silicon using an on-chip res-
onator,” Nature Nanotechnology 14, 742–746 (2019).
[54] S. Schaal, I. Ahmed, J. A. Haigh, L. Hutin, B. Bertrand,
S. Barraud, M. Vinet, C.-M. Lee, N. Stelmashenko,
J. W. A. Robinson, J. Y. Qiu, S. Hacohen-Gourgy, I. Sid-
diqi, M. F. Gonzalez-Zalba, and J. J. L. Morton, “Fast
Gate-Based Readout of Silicon Quantum Dots Using
Josephson Parametric Amplification,” Physical Review
Letters 124, 067701 (2020).
[55] J. M. Elzerman, R. Hanson, L. H. Willems van Beveren,
B. Witkamp, L. M. K. Vandersypen, and L. P. Kouwen-
hoven, “Single-shot read-out of an individual electron
spin in a quantum dot,” Nature 430, 431–435 (2004).
[56] V. Srinivasa, K. C. Nowack, M. Shafiei, L. M. K. Van-
dersypen, and J. M. Taylor, “Simultaneous Spin-Charge
Relaxation in Double Quantum Dots,” Physical Review
Letters 110, 196803 (2013).
[57] Benoit Bertrand, Hanno Flentje, Shintaro Takada, Michi-
hisa Yamamoto, Seigo Tarucha, Arne Ludwig, An-
dreas D. Wieck, Christopher Bäuerle, and Tristan Me-
unier, “Quantum Manipulation of Two-Electron Spin
States in Isolated Double Quantum Dots,” Physical Re-
view Letters 115, 096801 (2015).
[58] M. A. Fogarty, K. W. Chan, B. Hensen, W. Huang,
T. Tanttu, C. H. Yang, A. Laucht, M. Veldhorst, F. E.
Hudson, K. M. Itoh, D. Culcer, T. D. Ladd, A. Morello,
and A. S. Dzurak, “Integrated silicon qubit platform with
single-spin addressability, exchange control and single-
shot singlet-triplet readout,” Nature Communications 9,
4370 (2018).
[59] C. H. Yang, R. C. C. Leon, J. C. C. Hwang, A. Saraiva,
T. Tanttu, W. Huang, J. Camirand Lemyre, K. W.
Chan, K. Y. Tan, F. E. Hudson, K. M. Itoh, A. Morello,
M. Pioro-Ladrière, A. Laucht, and A. S. Dzurak, “Oper-
ation of a silicon quantum processor unit cell above one
kelvin,” Nature 580, 350–354 (2020).
[60] Andrea Morello, Jarryd J. Pla, Floris A. Zwanenburg,
Kok W. Chan, Kuan Y. Tan, Hans Huebl, Mikko
Möttönen, Christopher D. Nugroho, Changyi Yang, Jes-
sica A. van Donkelaar, Andrew D. C. Alves, David N.
Jamieson, Christopher C. Escott, Lloyd C. L. Hollenberg,
Robert G. Clark, and Andrew S. Dzurak, “Single-shot
readout of an electron spin in silicon,” Nature 467, 687–
691 (2010).
[61] M. D. Shulman, S. P. Harvey, J. M. Nichol, S. D. Bartlett,
A. C. Doherty, V. Umansky, and A. Yacoby, “Suppress-
ing qubit dephasing using real-time Hamiltonian estima-
tion,” Nature Communications 5, 5156 (2014).
[62] David C. McKay, Stefan Filipp, Antonio Mezzacapo,
Easwar Magesan, Jerry M. Chow, and Jay M. Gambetta,
“Universal Gate for Fixed-Frequency Qubits via a Tun-
able Bus,” Physical Review Applied 6, 064007 (2016).
[63] Norbert Schuch and Jens Siewert, “Natural two-qubit
gate for quantum computation using the XY inter-
action,” Physical Review A 67 (2003), 10.1103/Phys-
RevA.67.032301.
[64] David C. McKay, Christopher J. Wood, Sarah Sheldon,
Jerry M. Chow, and Jay M. Gambetta, “Efficient Z-
Gates for Quantum Computing,” Physical Review A 96
(2017), 10.1103/PhysRevA.96.022330.
[65] Frank Arute, Kunal Arya, Ryan Babbush, Dave Bacon,
Joseph C. Bardin, Rami Barends, Rupak Biswas, Sergio
Boixo, Fernando G. S. L. Brandao, David A. Buell, Brian
Burkett, Yu Chen, Zijun Chen, Ben Chiaro, Roberto
Collins, William Courtney, Andrew Dunsworth, Ed-
ward Farhi, Brooks Foxen, Austin Fowler, Craig Gidney,26
Marissa Giustina, Rob Graff, Keith Guerin, Steve Habeg-
ger, Matthew P. Harrigan, Michael J. Hartmann, Alan
Ho, Markus Hoffmann, Trent Huang, Travis S. Humble,
Sergei V. Isakov, Evan Jeffrey, Zhang Jiang, Dvir Kafri,
Kostyantyn Kechedzhi, Julian Kelly, Paul V. Klimov,
Sergey Knysh, Alexander Korotkov, Fedor Kostritsa,
David Landhuis, Mike Lindmark, Erik Lucero, Dmitry
Lyakh, Salvatore Mandrà, Jarrod R. McClean, Matthew
McEwen, Anthony Megrant, Xiao Mi, Kristel Michielsen,
Masoud Mohseni, Josh Mutus, Ofer Naaman, Matthew
Neeley, Charles Neill, Murphy Yuezhen Niu, Eric Os-
tby, Andre Petukhov, John C. Platt, Chris Quintana,
Eleanor G. Rieffel, Pedram Roushan, Nicholas C. Ru-
bin, Daniel Sank, Kevin J. Satzinger, Vadim Smelyan-
skiy, Kevin J. Sung, Matthew D. Trevithick, Amit
Vainsencher, Benjamin Villalonga, Theodore White,
Z. Jamie Yao, Ping Yeh, Adam Zalcman, Hartmut Neven,
and John M. Martinis, “Quantum supremacy using a
programmable superconducting processor,” Nature 574,
505–510 (2019).
[66] A. Chiesa, F. Tacchino, M. Grossi, P. Santini, I. Tav-
ernelli, D. Gerace, and S. Carretta, “Quantum hard-
ware simulating four-dimensional inelastic neutron scat-
tering,” Nature Physics 15, 455–459 (2019).
[67] G Wendin, “Quantum information processing with su-
perconducting circuits: A review,” Reports on Progress
in Physics 80, 106001 (2017).
[68] M. D. Reed, B. R. Johnson, A. A. Houck, L. DiCarlo,
J. M. Chow, D. I. Schuster, L. Frunzio, and R. J.
Schoelkopf, “Fast reset and suppressing spontaneous
emission of a superconducting qubit,” Applied Physics
Letters 96, 203110 (2010).
[69] T. Walter, P. Kurpiers, S. Gasparinetti, P. Mag-
nard, A. Potočnik, Y. Salathé, M. Pechal, M. Mon-
dal, M. Oppliger, C. Eichler, and A. Wallraff, “Rapid
High-Fidelity Single-Shot Dispersive Readout of Super-
conducting Qubits,” Physical Review Applied 7, 054020
(2017).
[70] Zhenyu Cai, Xiaosi Xu, and Simon C. Benjamin, “Mit-
igating coherent noise using Pauli conjugation,” npj
Quantum Information 6, 1–9 (2020).
[71] Jarrod R. McClean, Mollie E. Kimchi-Schwartz,
Jonathan Carter, and Wibe A. de Jong, “Hybrid
quantum-classical hierarchy for mitigation of decoherence
and determination of excited states,” Physical Review A
95 (2017), 10.1103/PhysRevA.95.042308.
[72] Zhang Jiang, Jarrod McClean, Ryan Babbush, and Hart-
mut Neven, “Majorana Loop Stabilizer Codes for Error
Mitigation in Fermionic Quantum Simulations,” Physical
Review Applied 12, 064041 (2019).
[73] Jarrod R. McClean, Zhang Jiang, Nicholas C. Rubin,
Ryan Babbush, and Hartmut Neven, “Decoding quan-
tum errors with subspace expansions,” Nature Commu-
nications 11, 636 (2020).
[74] Kosuke Mitarai and Keisuke Fujii, “Methodology for
replacing indirect measurements with direct measure-
ments,” Physical Review Research 1, 013006 (2019).