Stim: a fast stabilizer circuit simulator
Craig Gidney
Google Inc., Santa Barbara, California 93117, USA

arXiv:2103.02202v3 [quant-ph] 18 Jun 2021

June 21, 2021

This paper presents “Stim", a fast simulator for quantum stabilizer circuits. The paper
explains how Stim works and compares it to existing tools. With no foreknowledge, Stim
can analyze a distance 100 surface code circuit (20 thousand qubits, 8 million gates, 1
million measurements) in 15 seconds and then begin sampling full circuit shots at a rate of
1 kHz. Stim uses a stabilizer tableau representation, similar to Aaronson and Gottesman’s
CHP simulator, but with three main improvements. First, Stim improves the asymptotic
complexity of deterministic measurement from quadratic to linear by tracking the inverse of
the circuit’s stabilizer tableau. Second, Stim improves the constant factors of the algorithm
by using a cache-friendly data layout and 256 bit wide SIMD instructions. Third, Stim only
uses expensive stabilizer tableau simulation to create an initial reference sample. Further
samples are collected in bulk by using that sample as a reference for batches of Pauli frames
propagating through the circuit.

Readers who want to try Stim can find its source code in this paper’s ancillary files or on github at
https: // github. com/ quantumlib/ stim . Stim is also available as a Python 3 pypi package installed
via “pip install stim". There is also a pypi package “stimcirq" that exposes stim as a cirq sampler.

1 Introduction
In the field of human computer interaction, an important metric is the delay between human action
and computer reaction. Quoting Jakob Nielsen [25, 16]:
• 0.1 seconds is about the limit for having the user feel that the system is reacting instantaneously
[...]
• 1.0 second is about the limit for the user’s flow of thought to stay uninterrupted [...]
• 10 seconds is about the limit for keeping the user’s attention [...]
I bring this up because the underlying motivation driving this paper is that I want to tinker with
huge stabilizer circuits, and I want to stand in the 0.1s bucket while I do it. For example, consider the
single level 15-to-1 surface code T state factory shown in figure 4 of [11]. It corresponds to a circuit
with millions of gates spanning 15 thousand qubits. What would it take to simulate that in 0.1 seconds,
with no built-in preconceptions about the surface code, while a user makes iterative changes that break
and restore the functionality of the circuit? There are several obstacles that make this difficult.
First, if a circuit has a million gates, and your computer’s clock speed is 2 gigahertz, then the
simulator has a budget of 200 clock cycles per gate. That’s a tight budget.
Second, describing an arbitrary n-qubit stabilizer state takes at least 21 n2 bits [14, 22, 18]. This
means that, in the worst case, a general stabilizer simulator that works in an online fashion will
Craig Gidney: craiggidney@google.com

Accepted in Quantum 2021-06-16, click title to verify

1

Figure 1: Delay until one thousandth sample on d × d × d surface code memory circuits [15]. The intention of
this benchmark is to highlight simulators that can perform some sort of compilation or analysis that lowers the
cost of taking multiple samples. Stim does particularly well on this benchmark, with timings almost identical to
its time-to-first-sample. This is because it uses its first sample as a reference for batches of hundreds or thousands
of Pauli frame simulations that are updated in parallel using SIMD instructions. The per-sample performance of
Qiskit’s simulator also improves when collecting more than one sample.

Accepted in Quantum 2021-06-16, click title to verify

2

need megabytes of information to track the state of a 15000 qubit system. Storing this amount of
information is not a problem. The problem is repeatedly touching that information without blowing
the budget on cache misses.
Third, typically, simulating a Clifford gate has complexity Ω(n) where n is the number of qubits
in the circuit. Given the aforementioned cycle budget, the constant factor hiding behind that Ω has
to be roughly 0.01 cycles.
Fourth, the surface code is chock full of measurements and, basically, historically, the cost of
measurements in stabilizer simulators started at Θ(n3 ) [13], improved to Θ(n2 ) [1], and then stayed
there. Aaronson and Gottesman’s [1] CHP simulator? Measurement takes Θ(n2 ) time in the worst
case. Anders and Briegel’s [3] graph state simulator? Measurement takes Θ(n2 ) time in the worst
case. Bravyi et al’s [6] CH form simulator? Measurement takes Θ(n2 ) time in the worst case. We
can’t afford Θ(n2 ) time.
Fifth, the circuit I’ve been talking about isn’t even technically a stabilizer circuit. It contains magic
state injections. This obstacle has actually been the subject of a lot of recent work [6, 7, 20, 19]. I’ll
be completely ignoring it in this paper.
Sixth, when simulating an error correcting circuit, it’s common to sample the circuit millions or
even trillions of times. For example, going to large code distances can allow a lone half distance error
mechanism to shine through the background haze of full distance errors. But logical errors become
rare at large code distances, and so many samples have to be taken to see them. Based on discussions
I’ve had with co-workers who have done these sorts of large scale simulations [12], the main bottleneck
is not decoding the errors but rather (surprisingly) generating the samples. So it’s not just the latency
until the first sample that matters; the sustained bulk sampling rate is also important.
With all those obstacles listed I should note that, of course, by using hardcoded knowledge about
magic state distillation and the surface code, it’s possible to make a specialized simulator that could
solve my example case much faster than a general stabilizer circuit simulator. But my underlying
motivation is one of exploration, and I would strongly prefer to create a tool whose performance and
correctness doesn’t require understanding the behavior of places I haven’t been yet. So, in this paper,
I present my failed attempt to reach my ridiculous goal. The result is a software tool I’ve named
"Stim". Although Stim can’t simulate a 15 thousand qubit surface code circuit with millions of gates
in under a tenth of a second, it can at least get that job done in roughly ten seconds. Then, with that
initial sample acquired, it can begin producing batches of hundreds of samples in a tenth of the time.
Stim makes three key improvements over previous stabilizer simulators. These improvements address obstacle 4 (the measurement obstacle), obstacle 3 (the constant factor obstacle), and obstacle 6
(the mega sampling obstacle).
The measurement obstacle is addressed by making an algorithmic improvement that decreases the
time complexity of deterministic measurements from quadratic to linear. This is beneficial in contexts,
such as the surface code, where a circuit has many measurements but those measurements are almost
entirely deterministic.
The constant factor obstacle is addressed by using SIMD (Same Instruction Multiple Data) instructions in tight loops iterating over contiguous memory. Using SIMD is not a novel concept (e.g.
Aaronson et al’s CHP simulator [1] packs the bits from Pauli terms into bytes, which allows 8 to be
operated on by each instruction) but it’s technically challenging to implement well and Stim does it at
larger register sizes than previous work. Specifically, Stim uses 256 bit wide Advanced Vector Extensions (AVX) [30] and also I spent a lot of effort minimizing the number of operations in key loops. For
example, a core operation for most gates is multiplying together strings of Pauli terms, which requires
accumulating scalar factors from individual Pauli multiplications. I found a way to do this using only
11 bitwise operations per group of Paulis (see Figure 2). Modern Intel CPUs can apply 3 bitwise AVX
operations per clock cycle [21], and 256 is much larger than 11, suggesting that a budget of 0.01 cycles
per qubit during a Clifford gate isn’t quite as ridiculous as it seems.
The mega sampling obstacle is addressed by including a Pauli frame simulator that uses SIMD
instructions to operate on the state of hundreds of simulations in parallel. This amortizes the cost of
cache misses and branch mispredictions and other performance killers. This is a simple enough idea,
Accepted in Quantum 2021-06-16, click title to verify

3

but it gives Stim an enormous advantage over previous work when bulk sampling (see Figure 1).
This paper is divided into sections. In Section 2, I explain key background concepts that are needed
in order to understand the simulation strategies being described. Then in Section 3 and Section 4 I
describe the Pauli frame simulator and stabilizer tableau simulators implemented by Stim. Section 5
describes several of the software engineering details that went into Stim, such as why I decided to use
a dense representation instead of a sparse representation and how I went about testing that operations
were implemented correctly. Stim’s performance is compared to other stabilizer simulators in Section 6.
Finally, Section 7 wraps everything up. There are also a few short usage examples in Appendix A.

2 Key Concepts
2.1 Pauli Products




1 0
0 1
There are four Pauli gates: the identity I =
, the bit flip X =
, the phase flip Z =
0 1
1 0




1 0
0 −i
, and the other one Y =
. Sometimes the identity gate is not considered to be a Pauli
0 −1
i 0
gate, but in this paper it is.
A Pauli product is a set of Pauli gates applied to qubits. For example, X1 · Y2 · Z3 is a Pauli product
that applies X to qubit 1, Y to qubit 2, Z to qubit 3, and I to everything else. The set of all Pauli
products form a group under matrix multiplication. This group is called the Pauli group.
Paulis can be encoded in a variety of ways. One encoding, which I’ll be calling the “xz encoding",
represents a Pauli by decomposing it into an x bit representing the presence of an X gate, a z bit
representing the presence of a Z gate, and an ignored global phase:
encode_xz(P ) = (x, z) = (P ∈
/ {I, Z}, P ∈
/ {I, X}) = encode_xz(X x Z z )
Meaning:
encode_xz(I) = (0, 0)
encode_xz(X) = (1, 0)
encode_xz(Y ) = (1, 1)
encode_xz(Z) = (0, 1)
In the xz encoding (and most others), two Paulis can be multiplied up to global phase by xoring
their encoded representations:
encode_xz(P1 P2 ) = encode_xz(P1 ) ⊕ encode_xz(P2 ) = (x1 ⊕ x2 , z1 ⊕ z2 )
In Stim, Pauli products are represented by the stim::PauliString class.

2.2 Stabilizer Generators
When a quantum state is in the +1 eigenstate of an operation, that operation is said to be a stabilizer
of the state. For example: +Z is a stabilizer of the computational basis state |0i, +Z is not a
stabilizer of the computational basis state |1i, +X is a stabilizer of the superposed state |0i + |1i, and
−Y Y is a stabilizer of the entangled state |00i + |11i. Stabilizer operations that are Pauli products
are of particular interest, as they form the basis of the stabilizer formalism [13] (easily one of the
most important and foundational ideas in quantum error correction). In this paper, whenever I say
"stabilizer" I always mean "Pauli product stabilizer".
The stabilizers of a state form a group under multiplication. Let A and B be stabilizers of a state
|ψi, meaning A|ψi = |ψi = B|ψi. AB is also a stabilizer of |ψi, because AB|ψi = A|ψi = |ψi.
Accepted in Quantum 2021-06-16, click title to verify

4

The stabilizers of a state commute. Note that AB|ψi = BA|ψi, so 0 = (AB − BA)|ψi = [A, B]|ψi.
The commutator of A and B must project |ψi to the zero vector. The commutators of Pauli products
are always scalar factors of Pauli products, where only the scalar factor can affect the length of |ψi,
so it must be the case that the scalar factor is zero, meaning [A, B] = 0 (i.e. A and B commute).
If you start with the set of all stabilizers of a state, and iteratively remove stabilizers that can be
formed by multiplying together other stabilizers, you are left with a small set of stabilizers referred to
as generators of the state’s stabilizer group. For example, |000i has seven stabilizers (not counting the
vacuous identity stabilizer) and these stabilizers can be generated by ZII, IZI, and IIZ. An n qubit
state will have at most n stabilizer generators. An n qubit state with exactly n stabilizer generators
is a stabilizer state.

2.3 Stabilizer Tableaus
A Clifford operation is a unitary quantum operation that conjugates Pauli products into Pauli products.
C is Clifford if, for all pauli products P , it is the case that C † P C is also a Pauli product. In fact, a
Clifford operation can be uniquely identified (up to global phase) by how it conjugates Pauli products.
A stabilizer tableau is a representation of a Clifford operation that simply directly stores how the
Clifford operation conjugates each generator of the Pauli group. In this paper, I use the generators Xq
and Zq for each qubit q that the operation touches.
For example, here is a stabilizer tableau for the Controlled Y gate CY :
±
tableau(CY ) =
1
2

X1
+
X
Y

Z1
+
Z

X2
+
Z
X

Z2
+
Z
Z

Each column describes how CY conjugates one of the four generators of the two qubit Pauli group.
The column labelled X1 states that CY conjugates X1 into +X1 Y2 , i.e. that CY−1 X1 CY = X1 Y2 .
Any qubit not mentioned by a tableau is unaffected by that tableau. For example, if Xq does not
appear in the tableau then it is understood that the tableau’s operation conjugates Xq into Xq .
In order for a stabilizer tableau to be valid, i.e. to represent a Clifford operation, it must preserve
commutativity and anticommutativity. The Pauli products in its columns must commute or anticommute in the same way that its generators do. The column for Xa must commute with the column
for Xb and the column for Zb , but must anticommute with the column for Za . Also, a valid tableau
doesn’t have missing columns. If there is a row for qubit q, there must be columns for the generators
Xq and Zq .
Storing an n-qubit stabilizer tableau uses 4n2 + O(n) bits. There are 2n generator outputs to store,
each output has n Pauli terms, and each Pauli term is xz-encoded into two bits.
In Stim, stabilizer tableaus are represented by the class stim::Tableau. Storing the stabilizer
tableau is Stim’s dominant space cost. All other space costs are linear in the number of qubits.
2.3.1

Conjugating a Pauli Product by a Tableau

To conjugate a Pauli product observable by the Clifford operation represented by a stabilizer tableau,
start by decomposing the Pauli product into the generators listed in the tableau. Then use the fact that
conjugation distributes over matrix multiplication to conjugate each of the generators, and re-assemble
the resulting Pauli product.
For example, suppose we want to apply the Controlled-Y tableau to the Pauli product X1 Y2 .
We start by decomposing X1 Y2 into its generators i(X1 )(X2 )(Z2 ). We then look up each generator in the table, replacing the generator with the result of the lookup. This produces the result
i(X1 Y2 )(Z1 X1 )(Z1 Z2 ). We multiply these Pauli products together to get the result X1 . We conclude
that CY−1 X1 Y2 CY = X1 .

Accepted in Quantum 2021-06-16, click title to verify

5

When a Pauli product involves qubits that do not appear in the stabilizer tableau, and we want
to conjugate the Pauli product inplace, those additional qubits do not need to be touched. If the
tableau covers m qubits, and the Pauli product has c qubits in common with the tableau, then each of
the O(c) table lookups has cost O(m) (including multiplying together terms at the end). Therefore,
the complexity of inplace conjugation of an n qubit Pauli product by an m qubit stabilizer tableau
with c qubits in common is O(mc) with no dependence on n (this assumes that it is not necessary to
determine which qubits are in common). Note that O(mc) ⊆ O(m2 ).
In Stim, the method stim::Tableau::apply_within performs inplace conjugation of a Pauli product by a tableau. Stim also supports out of place conjugation via the stim::Tableau::operator()
operator.
2.3.2

Composing Tableaus

Given an N -qubit stabilizer tableau A and an m-qubit stabilizer tableau B where m ≤ N , we may
want to append or prepend B into A.
Inplace appending B into A, i.e. performing the mutation A → B◦A, is done by inplace conjugating
each of A’s columns with B. Since there are N columns, and inplace conjugation by an m qubit tableau
takes O(m2 ) time, inplace appending takes O(N m2 ) time.
Inplace prepending B into A is done by computing the result of conjugating each of B’s generators’
outputs by A. For each generator gq in B, we compute gq0 = A−1 B −1 gq BA. After computing all of
the gq0 values, we write gq0 into A under gq for each gq from B. There are m generators to conjugate by
B and then by A. The cost of conjugating by B is O(m), since the generator has 1 qubit in common
with B. The cost of then conjugating by A is O(N m), since the output from B has at most m qubits
in common with A. Therefore the complexity of inplace prepending is the same as inplace appending:
O(N m2 ).
In Stim, inplace composition is implemented by the stim::Tableau::inplace_scatter_append
method and the stim::Tableau::inplace_scatter_prepend method. There are also many specialized optimized methods for inplace composition of common gates, such as stim::Tableau::
prepend_SQRT_Z.
2.3.3

Inverting Tableaus

The inverse T −1 of a stabilizer tableau T is the unique tableau that satisfies T ◦ T −1 = T −1 ◦ T = I,
where I is the identity tableau.
Although Clifford circuits can contain highly nonlocal effects such as entanglement, inverting the
Pauli terms in a stabilizer tableau is almost entirely a local process. For example, consider the following
partially specified stabilizer tableau:
±
1
T =
2
3
4

X1
?
?
?
?
?

Z1
?
?
?
?
?

X2
?
?
?
?
?

Z2
?
?
?
?
?

X3
?
?
?
?
X

Z3
?
?
?
?

X4
?
?
?
?
?

Z4
?
?
?
?
?

This tableau specifies four bits of information. It states that conjugating X3 by T will produce a
Pauli product that has an X term on qubit 4, and that conjugating Z3 by T produces a Pauli product
with no term on qubit 4. Nothing else is specified.
What can we determine about the inverse tableau, using only these four bits of information? Well,
we know that the generator X4 commutes with T −1 X3 T . Therefore T X4 T −1 must also commute with
T T −1 X3 T T −1 = X3 , since conjugation preserves commutation. This means that the term on qubit
3 of T X4 T −1 must be either X or I. Furthermore, because X4 commutes with T −1 Z3 T , we know
T X4 T −1 must also commute with Z3 . This leaves only one possibility for the term on qubit 3 resulting

Accepted in Quantum 2021-06-16, click title to verify

6

from conjugating X4 by the inverse of T : the identity gate. We can similarly solve for the term on
qubit 3 of T Z3 T −1 . Given four bits of information about the tableau, we have derived four bits of
information about the inverse tableau:
±
1
−1
T =
2
3
4

X1
?
?
?
?
?

Z1
?
?
?
?
?

X2
?
?
?
?
?

Z2
?
?
?
?
?

X3
?
?
?
?
?

Z3
?
?
?
?
?

X4
?
?
?
?

Z4
?
?
?
Z
?

The terms on qubit b that result from applying T to Xa and Za always completely determine the
terms on qubit a from applying T −1 to Xb and Zb . To compute the Pauli terms of the inverse tableau,
all that is needed is to transpose the input and output indices and then apply a few local tweaks that
correspond to solving the commutation constraints.
With the Pauli terms computed, we can move on to computing the signs. Let S be the tableau with
the same Pauli terms as T −1 , but with all signs positive. If the sign in the column for the generator
gq is negative, then round-tripping gq through S and then T will return negative −gq instead of +gq .
That is to say, the sign of the gq column in T −1 is equal to T Sgq S −1 T −1 gq . To compute the signs, we
evaluate this expression for each generator gq .
Interestingly, computing the signs of the inverse tableau is more expensive than computing the
Pauli terms. It takes O(n2 ) time to compute the Pauli terms of the inverse of an n qubit tableau, and
O(n3 ) time to compute the signs. One possible way to avoid this cost is to associate a pair of signs
with every row of the tableau, such that the column signs of the inverse tableau are equal to the row
signs of the tableau. When appending and prepending operations into a tableau, the row signs can be
updated along with the column signs at no additional cost (asymptotically speaking). However, for
the use case in this paper, only the column signs are needed so I won’t bother with including the row
signs.
In Stim, the inverse of a tableau can be computed using the stim::Tableau::inverse method.

2.4 Pauli Frames
A Pauli frame stores, for each qubit, whether or not that qubit has been bit flipped and/or phase
flipped relative to some reference state. A Pauli frame can be moved through a Clifford circuit in the
same way that Pauli product observables are moved through the circuit: by conjugating the frame
by the Clifford operations that the frame is passing through. In effect, a Pauli frame is just a Pauli
product where the global phase is ignored.
2.4.1

Tracking Noise

When simulating a noisy stabilizer circuit, where the noise is composed of probabilistic Pauli operations,
it is not necessary to directly apply the noise to the simulated qubits. Instead, the noise can be
accumulated into a Pauli frame stored alongside the simulation [23]. As the simulation progresses,
applying gates to the qubits, the Pauli frame is kept synchronized with the simulation by conjugating
the frame’s contents by the same gates.
When the simulation reports the measurement result from a qubit q, and the Pauli frame is storing
an X or Y update for q, the measurement result is intercepted and inverted before being forwarded
along. The forwarded measurement are equivalent to samples from the noisy circuit.
In other words, by using a Pauli frame, you can augment any stabilizer simulator into a noisy
stabilizer simulator. This works even without access to the internal implementation details of that
simulator.

Accepted in Quantum 2021-06-16, click title to verify

7

2.4.2

Tracking Corrections

Pauli frames can also track corrective Pauli operations, so that those operations don’t have to be
applied to the underlying qubits. For example, this can be used to augment a black box non-adaptive
stabilizer simulator into a simulator that supports adaptive Pauli operations that depend on previous
measurement results. This even works if the simulator is replaced by a physical quantum computer
[29].
The ability to track corrections from the outside using a Pauli frame is a key technique in quantum
error correction [23]. It is the fundamental reason why just-in-time decoding of errors isn’t needed for
stabilizer codes like the surface code [10]. Any corrections that are needed can be backdated into the
Pauli frame at the appropriate time, and propagated forward through the circuit to the current time
by toggling recorded measurements as dictated by the Pauli frame.

3 Pauli Frame Simulation
A Pauli frame simulator works by propagating a Pauli frame through a circuit [27]. Clifford operations
conjugate the frame, noise processes multiply Paulis into the frame, and collapsing operations randomize parts of the frame. The benefit of Pauli frame simulation is that the frame only takes O(n) bits
to store and O(1) time to update per gate. The downside of Pauli frame simulation is that it doesn’t
tell you measurement results; it tells you whether or not measurements were flipped. To convert this
information into actual measurement results, you need a noiseless reference sample to diff against.
In a Pauli frame simulation, noise processes must be Pauli channels (i.e. equivalent to sampling a
Pauli product from a probability distribution and applying the sampled product to the system’s state).
For example, dephasing and depolarization are Pauli channels but relaxation to the ground state and
leaking outside the computational basis aren’t. A Pauli frame simulator simulates a Pauli channel
noise process by sampling a Pauli product from the Pauli product distribution corresponding to the
noise process and multiplying the sampled Pauli product into the Pauli frame.
Paulis can also be multiplied into the Pauli frame by collapsing operations (initializations, resets, and measurements). These operations introduce new stabilizers into the system. To force later
measurements to have random results if they measure observables that anticommute with a newly
introduced stabilizer, the stabilizer is multiplied into the Pauli frame with 50% probability. In other
words, after each initialization and reset and measurement, a Z_ERROR(0.5) is applied to the target
qubit. Conveniently, inserting these random Z operations is equivalent to replacing the noiseless reference sample that is being used with another independent noiseless sample from the circuit. The
random Z operations make all reference samples interchangeable and reusable.
Putting all of the pieces together, a Pauli frame simulation works as follows. (Note: this summary
will describe actions as if they were applied to one isolated Pauli frame. Stim uses SIMD operations
to apply each action to multiple frames simultaneously.)
1. A reference sample is collected from the target circuit, with all noise processes disabled, using
some other method. The reference sample can be used and reused as many times as needed.
2. A Pauli frame is initialized with a randomly chosen I or Z term on each qubit (due to initialization
being a collapsing operation).
3. The Pauli frame is advanced through the circuit.
• When the frame crosses a Clifford operation C, the frame undergoes the update F →
C −1 F C.
• When the frame crosses a reset, the qubit’s term in the frame is set to the identity operation.
Then a Z on the target qubit is multiplied into the frame with 50% probability, because
resets are collapsing operations.

Accepted in Quantum 2021-06-16, click title to verify

8

• When the frame crosses a Pauli error channel, a Pauli product is sampled from the error
channel (usually the no-error identity operation is by far the most likely) and multiplied
into the frame.
• When the frame crosses a measurement, the result of that measurement (for the simulation
run that the frame represents) is reported as rM ⊕xq (where rM is the reference measurement
result and xq is true if the Pauli frame has an X or Y term on the target qubit). Then a Z
on the target qubit is multiplied into the frame with 50% probability, because measurements
are collapsing operations.
4. If more samples of the circuit are needed, go to step 2. Otherwise stop.

4 Stabilizer Tableau Simulation
Consider the first measurement in a stabilizer circuit. (If there are multiple measurements tied for
first, pick one of them arbitrarily.) This measurement is measuring the observable Zq , where q is the
qubit targeted by the measurement. Between this measurement and the |0i states at start of the circuit
there are a variety of Clifford gates forming a compound Clifford operation C. By conjugating the
current-time observable Zq by the inverse Clifford operation C −1 , we get some observable from the
start of time that is equivalent to Zq at the current time. Measuring CZq C −1 at the start of time is
equivalent to measuring Zq at the current time.
Suppose that CZq C −1 is equal to −Za Zb . At the start of time we know that qubits a and b are
in the |0i state, i.e. in the +1 eigenstate of the Z observable. Therefore we can replace Za with +1,
and we can do the same for Zb . If we were to measure −Za Zb at the start of time, we would get a
measurement result of −1. And since this observable is equivalent to Zq at the current time, we can
conclude that measuring Zq now should also return a deterministic measurement result of −1.
Suppose alternatively that CZq C −1 was equal to −Xa Xb . This start-of-time observable anticommutes with the initial state, so the measurement result will be random. But, in order to fully resolve
the measurement, we need to simplify the observable we are dealing with. The key insight to make is
that, because all qubits are initialized into the |0i state, a controlled operation inserted at the start
of time will have no effect on the state (because the control is not satisfied). However, inserting a
controlled operation at the start of time can change the start-of-time observables. For example, if we
insert a CNOT operation controlled by qubit a and targeting qubit b at the start of time, we will
change C so that CZq C −1 is equal to −Xa instead of −Xa Xb . We like this, because it reduces the
number of terms that are present. Measuring Zq at the current time is now equivalent to measuring
−Xa at the beginning of time. The latter measurement is clearly 50/50 random and forces qubit a into
either the |+i or |−i state (at the start of time). We emulate the measurement collapse by inserting
a Hadamard gate at the start of time (to prepare a |+i) and then randomly inserting an X gate or
not before the Hadamard (to choose between |+i and |−i). After this change to the circuit, the Zq
observable at the current time is equivalent to either Za or −Za at the start of time, and we have
reduced the random measurement case to the deterministic measurement case.
Each measurement in the circuit, working from the start of time to the end of time, can be resolved
in the same way that we resolved these two example cases. Measurements whose equivalent-start-oftime-observable contain only Z terms are deterministic, and have a result equal to the sign of their
equivalent-start-of-time-observable. After reporting this result, the offending measurement gate can
be deleted from the circuit. Measurements whose equivalent-start-of-time-observable contain an X or
Y term trigger an elimination procedure which simplifies their observable into an observable with a
single X term. This can be done by introducing no-effect controlled operations and no-effect S gates
at the start of time. Once a single term remains, a Hadamard gate is inserted at the start of time
to emulate the X observable collapsing and an X gate is randomly inserted at the start of time to
emulate the randomness of the result. This forces the measurement under consideration to become
deterministic, so it can be handled by the deterministic case.

Accepted in Quantum 2021-06-16, click title to verify

9

4.1 The Asymptotic Benefits of Backwards Thinking
At this point I should note that, in previous work [1], this whole process was explained in reverse.
Instead of being framed in terms of how single qubit observables at the current time mapped to
compound observables at the start of time, previous work was framed in terms of single qubit stabilizers
and “destabilizers" at the start of time being mapped to compound Pauli products at the current time.
For example, measurements were classified as deterministic or random based on whether or not they
anticommuted with any of the current-time stabilizers. This is equivalent to checking whether the Z
observable mapped backward anticommutes with the initial state for the same reason that inverting a
Clifford tableau is nearly a transposition.
The downside of thinking in terms of mapping forwards, instead of mapping backwards, is that the
measurement result is not immediately available when a measurement is deterministic. When mapping
backwards, the measurement result is the sign of the equivalent observable at the start of time. This
allows a deterministic measurement to be classified as deterministic and resolved in worst case time
O(n), where n is the number of qubits. When mapping forwards, it is necessary to find a combination
of stabilizers which multiply together to form the desired measurement’s observable. That process has
a worst case time of O(n2 ), instead of O(n).

4.2 Tracking the Tableau
To perform a stabilizer tableau simulation efficiently, we need a data structure where we can efficiently
append Clifford operations (as we progress further into the circuit), efficiently prepend operations (for
the elimination process at the beginning of time), and efficiently determine the start-of-time observable
of a measurement. In other words, we need a stabilizer tableau.
Here are the steps used to perform a stabilizer tableau simulation:
1. Initialize an identity stabilizer tableau T . To aide the intuition, imagine it being positioned at
the start of the circuit being simulated, just after the qubits have been initialized into the |0i
state.
2. Begin folding circuit operations into T , working from earliest to latest.
• To fold a Clifford gate C into T , perform an inplace prepend of C −1 into T then delete
C from the circuit. (We prepend the inverse of C, instead of appending C, because T is
tracking the inverse of the circuit processed so far.)
• To fold a measurement gate on qubit q into T , first check whether or not the Zq column in
T contains any X or Y terms. If it does, the measurement is random and must be resolved.
– If the measurement is random, arbitrarily pick one of the X or Y terms to be the “pivot".
For each other X or Y term, perform an inplace append into T of a CNOT operation
controlled by the pivot targeting that term. (It is not necessary to remove the leftover
Z terms.) To collapse the target qubit, append into T a single qubit operation targeting
the pivot, changing its term to a Z (from either an X or Y ). Finally, to randomize
the measurement result, flip a coin to decide whether or not to inplace append an X
operation on the pivot into T .
The measurement is now deterministic. Report the sign of the Zq column as the result, and
delete the measurement gate from the circuit.
• To fold a reset gate into T , perform a measurement on the qubit without reporting the
result. The qubit is now either in the |0i state or the |1i state, determined by the sign of
the Zq column of T . To force the qubit into the |0i state, overwrite the Zq column’s sign
with +1.
The asymptotic complexity of this simulation is O(ng + nd + n2 r) where n is the number of qubits,
g is the number of gates, d is the number of measurements that have a deterministic result given
Accepted in Quantum 2021-06-16, click title to verify

10

previous measurements, and r is the number of measurements that have random results. (Note: d and
r also include contributions from operations such as resets, which implicitly perform a measurement
as part of their implementation.) This is an improvement over the complexity O(ng + n2 d + n2 r) from
previous work.
An example of a context where this improvement provides an asymptotic advantage is simulating
a distance d surface code circuit for d rounds. Typically, such a circuit will have Θ(d2 ) qubits, Θ(d2 )
deterministic measurements in each round, and Θ(d2 ) random measurements in the first and last
round. Simulating this circuit by tracking the forward tableau has a worst case simulation cost of
Θ(d7 ) whereas tracking the inverse tableau results in a worst case cost of Θ(d6 ). (Interestingly, the
Θ(d6 ) cost comes entirely the random measurements in the first and last rounds. All of the intermediate
rounds combined have a cost of Θ(d5 ).)

5 Software Engineering
5.1 Data layout and vectorization
There are many factors that affect software speed, such as the choice of programming language, the
underlying algorithm, and company culture. However, when attempting to write code that performs
near the limits of what your computer is capable of, there are some factors that have to be considered.
Data layout is one of those factors.
In a good data layout, most data accesses are sequential. They are performed while iterating across
contiguous memory. This makes the memory accesses predictable, so that various caching mechanisms
can hide latency by prefetching data before it is needed.
In a bad data layout, data accesses are disorganized and difficult to predict, resulting in cache
misses. This can easily slow down your code by an order of magnitude (that’s what it did in some
quick tests I did) if not more [26].
When initially imagining Stim, I guessed that it was going to spend most of its time doing three key
types of operations. (1) Applying unitary operations and deterministic measurements to the stabilizer
tableau by interacting its columns. (2) Resolving random measurements by performing Gaussian
elimination over the rows of the stabilizer tableau. (3) Tweaking Pauli frames as they propagated
through the operations in a circuit.
Notice that there are both row-wise and column-wise operations being applied to the stabilizer
tableau. This is bad, because it means we have to pick one to be fast and one to be slow. Alternatively,
we can spend effort transposing the table data to switch from one being fast to the other being fast. In
the circuits I care about (error correcting circuits) random measurements tend to come in large bursts.
With that in mind, I decided to go with the switching strategy. Usually the stabilizer tableau is stored
in column major order, so that unitary operations and deterministic measurements are efficient. When
(hopefully large batches of) random measurements need to be processed, the tableau is temporarily
transposed into row major order. (An example of a circuit that penalizes this strategy is a surface
code circuit with a gauge covering a single missing data qubit [24].)
I did experiment with an alternative data layout where 256x256 bit blocks from the table were
contiguous in memory. This significantly reduces the cost of switching from column-wise to row-wise
operations (because only local transposes of the 256x256 blocks are needed). However, it also forces
key operations like Pauli string multiplication to skip through memory instead of iterating through
contiguous memory. Profiling showed that the costs outweighed the benefits.
For the Pauli frame simulator, I was initially worried that a good data layout didn’t exist. The
problem is that the gates being performed by the circuit are not predictable, and each only affects a
tiny number of bits in the Pauli frame. This is a worst case scenario when it comes to cache misses.
Even for circuits with well organized operations, like surface code circuits operating on local 2d grids,
some of the operations would have to be running “against the grain" of memory. I spent quite a lot of
time trying to think of workarounds for this problem.

Accepted in Quantum 2021-06-16, click title to verify

11

int inplace_pauli_string_multiplication (
int n, __m256i *x1 , __m256i *z1 __m256i *x2 , __m256i *z2) {
// The 1s and 2s bits of 256 two-bit counters .
__m256i c1 {};
__m256i c2 {};
// Iterate over data in 256 bit chunks .
for (int k = 0; k < n; k++) {
__m256i old_x1 = x1[k];
__m256i old_z1 = z1[k];
// Update the left hand side Paulis .
x1[k] ^= x2[k];
z1[k] ^= z2[k];
// Accumulate anti- commutation counts .
__m256i x1z2 = old_x1 & z2[k];
__m256i anti_commutes = (x2[k] & old_z1 ) ^ x1z2;
c2 ^= (c1 ^ x1[k] ^ z1[k] ^ x1z2) & anti_commutes ;
c1 ^= anti_commutes ;
}
// Determine final anti- commutation phase tally .
return ( popcount (c1) + 2 * popcount (c2 )) % 4;
}
Figure 2: Vectorized Pauli string multiplication. Multiplies one fixed length xz-encoded Pauli string into another
while computing the base-i logarithm of the resulting scalar phase. The loop body contains 4 SIMD loads, 4 SIMD
stores, and 11 bitwise SIMD operations (after trivial compiler optimizations). I believe the number of bitwise SIMD
operations is optimal, and would be very interested to hear if anyone can achieve the same effect with fewer.

Eventually, I realized that I shouldn’t be trying to vectorize within a Pauli frame simulation.
Instead, the correct thing to do is to vectorize across multiple Pauli frame simulations. The data
layout I decided on was to have 1024 frames packed together into a two dimensional table of bits, with
the major axis corresponding to the qubits in the frame and the minor axis (i.e. the contiguous-inmemory axis) corresponding to the different frames being tracked. Gates can then be applied to many
frames using single instructions. For example, an S gate targeting qubit q is performed by xoring xq
into zq , where xq and zq are the bits of the xz-encoded Pauli for qubit q in the Pauli frame. Instead
of individually operating on each xq and zq from each frame, there is a 256 bit word containing 256
separate xq bits from 256 frames, and a 256 bit word containing 256 separate zq bits from 256 frames,
and the S gate is applied to all 256 frames by one _mm256_xor_si256 instruction computing the 256
new zq values. The story is similar for all other gates (e.g. see Figure 3 for the CNOT gate’s code).
With this approach each gate may still touch memory in an unpredictable way, but the cost of the
cache miss will be amortized over a thousand parallel frame updates.
Another data layout decision I had to make as part of implementing Stim was whether or not to
interleave the x and z bits of xz-encoded Pauli products. Initially, I decided that for locality reasons
each 256 bit word should contain the 128 x bits and 128 z bits from 128 Paulis. This is a bad idea. It
violates a core rule of thumb for writing fast vectorized code: don’t mix different data together. For
example, consider simulating an S gate (again). As part of simulating the S gate, the x bits of a Pauli
string have to be xored pairwise into the z bits. If the x and z bits are in separate words, you can
process the xor part of the S gate for 256 Paulis using one AVX bitwise xor instruction. If the x and z
bits are in the same word, the xor will have to be accompanied by some shifting and masking and these
multiple instructions will have only processed 128 Paulis instead of 256. This realization flipped my
decision from “yes interleave" to “definitely do not interleave". (I also found that alternating between
256 bit x words and 256 bit z words, like XZXZXZXZ, was worse than doing all of one then all of the
Accepted in Quantum 2021-06-16, click title to verify

12

void apply_CNOT_to_batched_pauli_frames (
int n, __m256i *x1 , __m256i *z1 __m256i *x2 , __m256i *z2) {
// Iterate over tracked frames in chunks of 256.
for (int k = 0; k < n; k++) {
z1[k] ^= z2[k];
x2[k] ^= x1[k];
}
}
Figure 3: Vectorized code to apply a CNOT operation to a batch of 256n Pauli frames. Note that the code is
looping over multiple Pauli frames, not over multiple qubits. The argument x1 points at data storing whether or
not, for each Pauli frame, there is currently an X error on the control of the CNOT (the other arguments are similar,
but for the Z errors and/or the target qubit).

other, like XXXXZZZZ. That being said, in this case the difference was small enough that I wouldn’t be
confident of it reproducing.)

5.2 Sparse vs Dense
Stim uses a dense representation for its stabilizer tableau. Every bit is stored, even if almost all of the
bits are zero. In some contexts, like simulating the surface code, the stabilizer tableau representation
can be made sparse and so a dense representation is wasteful. Given how much I’ve been talking about
the surface code in this paper, shouldn’t I want to use a sparse representation instead of a dense one?
Well, maybe. There’s three issues that complicate the situation.
First, in order for a simulator to use a sparse representation, it has to find and maintain that
representation. To do this well, the simulator has to quickly solve non-local problems like “where are
the logical qubits hiding in this circuit?". In the general case, these problems look very similar to
problems with non-linear scaling (like Gaussian elimination).
Second, sparse representations hide huge constant factors compared to dense representations. For
example, Stim has a --detector_hypergraph mode where it groups error mechanisms present in
a circuit based on which annotated detectors and logical observables those errors flip. This error
analysis does work very similar to what the tableau simulator does, but using a sparse representation.
Despite that, the error analysis is slower on most of the circuits I care about. The problem is that a
key bottleneck operation is computing the symmetric difference of small sets of integers, and my best
efforts at writing code to do this quickly produced a result that takes on the order of ten nanoseconds to
process sets with ten items. By contrast, using a dense bit packed representation where the symmetric
difference is computed using 256 bit wide xor operations, ten nanoseconds is enough time to process
ten thousand items. In other words, if you care more about speed than space, you may find that a
sparse representation is worse until the sparsity of your data exceeds 99.9%.
Third, there is elegance in a piece of software that is unconditionally fast. It’s bad enough that
Stim’s performance depends on the density of random measurements in a circuit. I would prefer not
to involve even more complicated properties like the existence of a stabilizer basis with low weight
generators.
Using a sparse representation would be more appropriate for circuits with hundreds of thousands
or millions of qubits, where even storing the stabilizer tableau becomes problematic. Sparse representations are also more compelling in contexts where the hard or finicky parts of finding the sparse basis
are embedded into the representation of the problem (e.g. explicitly annotating the locations of the
logical qubits in the circuit).

Accepted in Quantum 2021-06-16, click title to verify

13

5.3 GPU Experiment Failure
I did a small test to check if using a GPU would be beneficial for stabilizer tableau simulation or
Pauli frame simulation. All of the expensive operations in a stabilizer simulation are embarrassingly
parallel bitwise operations. They are very similar to xoring two arrays together. So I wrote a WebGL2
fragment shader to xor together two large arrays, and tested how long it took.
I found that (surprisingly) the shader was roughly as fast at xoring as my CPU. I expected the
performance to be much better. In hindsight, I suspect this is because the arithmetic intensity of
xoring two arrays together is extremely low, and doesn’t use floating point arithmetic. That is to say,
bitwise xoring doesn’t hit on the comparative strengths of GPUs over CPUs.
This quick xor test suggests a GPU would perform poorly (or at least not significantly better than
a CPU) at stabilizer simulation. Since programming GPUs is harder, and was unlikely to give much
benefit, I dropped the idea.
(I caution the reader that perhaps I’m simply not familiar enough with GPU programming to have
produced a fast implementation. For example, perhaps a compute shader would be more effective or
perhaps I should have used a standalone GPU instead of an embedded GPU. There’s certainly no
fundamental obstacle to a specialized piece of hardware running huge bitwise operations significantly
faster than a CPU.)

5.4 Threading
I tried adding threading to various parts of Stim. For example, when given a batch of CNOT operations
to do, I tried partitioning them into two groups and running the two groups on separate threads.
Surprisingly, this was less than ten percent faster. I didn’t look deeply into why there was so little
benefit; I simply decided based on the measurement that the complexity of threading batches of
operations wasn’t worth the gain.
One place where I found that it was worth adding threading was when transposing stabilizer
tableaus. The stabilizer tableau’s data is divided into four independent pieces (x/z bits of X/Z observables), so it’s trivial to process each one on a separate thread without worries of contention. Overall I
found that at large sizes this was about twice as fast as not threading the tableau transpose.

5.5 Entropy
When running noisy Pauli frame simulations, Stim can consume gigabytes of entropy per second. Stim
gets this entropy by using std::mt19937_64, the 64 bit Mersenne twister PRNG included in C++’s
standard library. The PRNG is seeded using std::random_device, the questionable [17] source of
external entropy built into C++’s standard library.
Stim is often simulating noise that occurs with low probability (e.g. p < 1%). When deciding
whether or not each instance of a noise process has occurred, Stim applies an optimization that reduces
waste in the conversion from max-entropy bits to low-entropy bits. Instead of sampling from std::
bernoulli_distribution(p) n times, Stim samples the gap between errors using std::geometric_
distribution(p) np times (on average). This reduces the expected cost of sampling n potential errors
from Θ(n) to Θ(np + 1).
Sometimes noise occurs with intermediate probability (e.g. 10% < p < 40%). To decide whether
or not this type of noise occurs, Stim uses a hybrid sampling strategy. The desired probability p is
decomposed into a truncated probability ptrunc = b256pc/256 and a refinement probability prefine =
p−ptrunc
−8
, so bits that are true with this probability
1−ptrunc . The truncated probability is a multiple of 2
can be sampled quickly and exactly by generating a uniformly random byte, dividing it by 256, and
comparing it to the truncated probability. Bits that are true with the refinement probability can
also be sampled quickly, because the refinement probability is small. The bitwise OR of a truncated
probability bit and a refinement probability bit is a bit that is true with the desired intermediate
probability.

Accepted in Quantum 2021-06-16, click title to verify

14

These optimizations, and others, allow Stim to sample from any Bernoulli distribution at gigahertz
rates.

5.6 Sampling Detection Events
A “detector" is a specified set of measurement locations in a circuit, with the promise that xoring those
locations’ measurement results together will produce a deterministic value (under noiseless conditions).
When a detector’s measurements xor together into a value opposite to the expected one, that is a
“detection event" indicating the presence of errors. In addition to its measurement result sampling
mode --sample=#, Stim supports a detection event sampling mode --detect=#.
Note that, in principle, detection events can be sampled with better asymptotic complexity than
measurements. For example, consider that, in the surface code, an X error on a data qubit will flip
every single future measurement of a Z stabilizer involving that qubit. By contrast, when sampling
detection events, this same error flips two nearby detectors and that’s it. By sampling detection events
instead of measurements, errors with unbounded non-local effects can become errors with bounded
local effects. Another benefit of sampling detection events is that, since the only data that is being
reported is which detectors were flipped, otherwise-distinct errors can be fused together [8]. Ultimately,
by using a sparse representation for the set of flipped detectors, and sampling low-probability errors
the way I described in Section 5.5, sampling the detection events in a circuit with O(n) gates and
detectors can be done in O(npd + 1) operations (where p is the average error probability and d is the
average number of detectors flipped by an error). Contrast with the O(n) work needed to produce
measurement samples using a Pauli frame simulation.
Currently, Stim doesn’t implement the asymptotically efficient detector sampling method. Stim
produces detector samples by sampling measurement results and then combining them. This is because,
for the noise levels around 0.1% that are most interesting to me, the larger constant factors inherent
in using a sparse representation outweigh the asymptotic gains.

5.7 Testing
Stim contains a lot of code that is very easy to get wrong. There are hundreds of opportunities for
sign errors, transposition errors, substitution errors, and omissions that would go undetected without
testing. For example, embarrassingly, version 1.0 had a transposition error where the effects of the
X_ERROR and Z_ERROR noise channels were swapped when in --repl mode.
To verify the behavior of the operations in Stim, they are redundantly specified and the redundancies are checked for consistency. Each Clifford operation is specified in at least three different ways.
As a unitary matrix:


√
1 1−i 1−i
unitary( Y ) =
2 i−1 1−i
As a stabilizer tableau:
X1
√
tableau( Y ) = ± +
1 Z

Z1
−
X

And as hand-optimized simulator code calling vectorized subroutines:
void Tableau :: prepend_SQRT_Y ( size_t target ) {
// This method contains an intentional bug.
xs[ target ]. swap_with (zs[ target ]);
zs[ target ]. sign ^= 1;
}

Accepted in Quantum 2021-06-16, click title to verify

15

The unitary matrix and stabilizer tableau are validated against each other by using a vector state
simulator and the state channel duality. For each column in the tableau, the state vector simulator is
initialized to contain a number of EPR pairs equal to the number of qubits that the operation under
test acts on. Let S be the subsystem made up of the first qubit from each EPR pair. The state vector
simulator applies the column’s input observable to S as a Pauli product (including sign), applies the
unitary matrix of the operation under test, and applies the column’s output observable to S as a Pauli
product (including sign). It then verifies that the resulting state is equal (including global phase) to
the state produced when acting just the unitary matrix of the operation under test on S. This proves
that the unitary matrix conjugates the input Pauli product into the output Pauli product, as specified
by the tableau.
For some operations, further checks are needed
before I feel confident their unitary matrix and
√
tableau are correct. For example, consider the Y operation. The Y operation has two square roots
(up to global phase). It is an arbitrary convention which of the two roots is the principle root. What if
√ †
√
I mixed them up? Then I would enter the tableau for Y instead of Y , and also the unitary matrix
√ †
√
for Y instead of Y . Comparing the two will not catch the problem. In these cases, I also included
consistency tests which verify some disambiguating circuit identity. For example, √
I want the choice of
principle root to be consistent across axes, and I follow the usual convention that Z = diag(1, i). So
√
√
√ †
√
√
I can disambiguate Y by verifying that Y = HY Z · Z · HY Z 6= Y where HY Z = (Y + Z)/ 2.
Once an operation’s tableau is established as being correct, it can be used to verify the hand
optimized code. The test code does this by generating several large random tableaus [5], and confirming
that composing the operation’s tableau into the random tableau using a general method gives the
same result as applying the hand optimized code. Because of the local and discrete nature of tableau
operations, this sort of fuzzing is extremely effective at catching bugs.
One important risk factor in testing is the risk of simply forgetting to test an operation in the first
place. I’d normally use code coverage tools to verify that the tests are exercising everything, but I
couldn’t get any C++ code coverage tool that I tried to work. Instead, the test code takes advantage
of the fact that every supported gate appears as data in a list. This listed data is used for crucial
functionality such as parsing, so I can expect it to be complete. With this listed data, one test can
verify all of the defined gates. For example:
TEST(gate_data , tableau_data_vs_unitary_data ) {
for (const auto &gate : GATE_DATA . gates ()) {
if (gate. flags & GATE_IS_UNITARY ) {
EXPECT_TRUE ( tableau_agrees_with_unitary (
gate. tableau (), gate. unitary ())) << gate.name;
}
}
}
Noise channels are harder to test than Cliffords, because the behavior of noise channels isn’t deterministic. I tested noise channels by creating tests that sampled circuits applying the noise channel
to simple states. Then, statistical checks verified the consistency of the samples against independent
definitions of noise channels from Cirq [28]. The X_ERROR/Z_ERROR transposition that I mentioned
slipped through these tests because originally they only exercised the bulk sampling API (which was
a natural choice due to needing many samples), not the single-sample interactive API.
Tests are run with compiler optimizations enabled, but also run without compilation optimizations
with address and memory sanitization checks enabled. A continuous integration system verifies that
the tests pass before allowing commits to be merged into the main branch.

Accepted in Quantum 2021-06-16, click title to verify

16

Figure 4: Screenshot of results from stim_benchmark. Each line is the result of a small benchmark defined in Stim’s
source code. The ASCII bar indicators on the left show deviations from the reference time in a visual way that can
easily be scanned over. The location of the asterisk, relative to the center of the ASCII bar, indicates how many
decibels (factors of 1.26) slower or faster the run was (compared to the reference time). In the screenshot, a few
benchmarks are running slow. That could indicate some sort of performance regression, or could just be noise.

5.8 Profiling and Optimizing
To determine the performance of individual components of Stim, I wrote a small benchmarking framework that would repeatedly run some task and compare the time it took to a reference time. For
example, here is code benchmarking the multiplication of Pauli strings with ten thousand terms:
BENCHMARK ( PauliString_multiplication_10K ) {
size_t n = 10 * 1000;
PauliString p1(n);
PauliString p2(n);
benchmark_go ([&]() {
p1.ref (). inplace_right_mul_returning_log_i_scalar (p2 );
}). goal_nanos (90). show_rate (" Paulis ", n);
}
Note that an important assumption here is that the compiler is inlining the benchmark_go method
and the lambda. I found that making benchmark_go a template with the lambda’s type as a parameter
caused more consistent inlining, but I can make no guarantees.
The framework runs whatever is in the benchmark_go body for 0.5 seconds, counting how many
iterations were finished. It then produces output comparing the inferred time to a reference time.
Example benchmarking output can be seen in Figure 4. This benchmarking methodology would not
work well for a team of people (e.g. because different computers require different reference times), but
was sufficient for my purposes.
When I wanted to improve the performance of a benchmark, or fix a regression, I would build
Stim using debug flags -g -fno-omit-framepointer and run it under Linux’s perf tool to identify
functions and lines of code taking disproportionate amounts of time. For example, the reason that I
optimized the Bernoulli distribution sampling process to use less entropy per error is because profiling
showed that generating entropy for errors was a significant bottleneck.

5.9 Portability
One of the major downsides of using AVX instructions is that they are not portable. They won’t work
on older CPUs, and they won’t work on architectures besides x64 (e.g. most phones). Stim tries to
work around this by hiding all AVX instructions behind an opaque type simd_word. Stim includes

Accepted in Quantum 2021-06-16, click title to verify

17

one implementation of simd_word that uses 256-bit-wide AVX instruction, another that uses older
128-bit-wide SSE instructions, and another that uses no non-standard instructions. The presence of
defines like __AVX2__ then determine which simd_word implementation is used.
Because the size of a simd_word is not fixed, code is written in a fashion that avoids depending
on this size. For example, the class simd_bits, which represents a bit packed array that supports
vectorized instructions, will help the caller with this by automatically padding its size up to a multiple
of simd_word’s size. simd_bits also exposes methods which handle the boilerplate parts of iterating
over the words. simd_bit_table plays a similar role for two dimensional data.

5.10 Input Format
Users need some way of describing quantum circuits to Stim. I considered using an established format
for this, such as OpenQASM. I dropped the idea because OpenQASM has a lot of semantics that
would be time consuming to implement (such as functions, named variables, and file includes). Also
OpenQASM is currently undergoing a breaking version change [2].
Consequently, I decided to make yet another input format. Stim’s input format is nearly minimal.
It takes a series of lines, and each line can specify a gate to apply to some targets. For example, the line
“H 0" says to apply a Hadamard to qubit 0 and the line “CNOT 0 1" says to apply a Controlled-NOT
operation controlled by qubit 0 targeting qubit 1. That’s essentially all that’s necessary to know in
order to use the format, besides the names of supported gates.
There are of course several exceptions to this minimalist ideal. Blank lines are permitted. Lines can
be suffixed with a comment prefixed by a hash “# like this". Gates can be broadcast over multiple
targets like “H 0 1 2". And, most shamefully, there is a “REPEAT N {...}" macro which repeats a
block of instructions a given number of times (drastically reducing some file sizes).

5.11 Output Format
By default, Stim outputs a series of ‘0’ and ‘1’ characters, one for each measurement result. The
final measurement result is followed by a newline character ‘\n’. When multiple shots are taken, the
measurement results (and newline) from the first shot are output, then the results (and newline) from
the second shot, and so forth.
Stim also supports a binary output format, triggered by providing the command line argument
--out_format=b8. This format packs 8 measurements results into each byte of output, ordered from
least significant bit to most significant bit. The last byte output for a shot is padded to completion
with 0s. There is no separator between the bytes from separate shots.
In addition to these “dense" formats, Stim supports sparse output formats like --out_format=hits
and --out_format=r8 that focus on the indices of non-zero bits. These output formats are useful when
sampling detectors, because non-zero bits are rarer.

6 Comparison
I compared Stim’s performance to Aaronson and Gottesman’s chp simulator [1], IBM’s Qiskit simulator
(qiskit method=‘stabilizer’) [9], Google’s Cirq simulator (cirq.CliffordSimulator) [28], and
finally Anders and Briegel’s graphsim [3] simulator.
I performed the comparison benchmarks on my work laptop: a ThinkPad running gLinux (a Google
internal modified variant of Debian) with an Intel Core i7-8650U CPU @ 1.90GHz and 16GB of RAM.
I compiled stim and chp with g++ v10.2.1 using optimization level -O3. I generated circuit files
understood by each simulator (samples of these files are included in the ancillary files of this paper),
and then iterated through the files of each benchmark timing how long each simulator took. Output
from the simulators was discarded, not recorded. I didn’t do anything special to prepare the computer
for benchmarking except ensure it was plugged in with a full battery with no other user programs

Accepted in Quantum 2021-06-16, click title to verify

18

Figure 5: Delay until first sample on d × d × d unrotated surface code memory circuits [15]. The intention of this
benchmark is to highlight simulators that can take advantage of redundant structure in the surface code, such as
the abundance of local stabilizers and deterministic measurements. Based on the apparent scaling, it appears that
none of the simulators are making much use of the structure of the surface code. Stim scales comparatively well on
this benchmark because Stim performs deterministic measurements in worst case linear time instead of quadratic
time.

running. I didn’t disable dynamic frequency scaling or auto-updating mechanisms (the simulators
differ in performance by large enough factors that I don’t think this is a problem).
Timing was done by calling time.monotonic() or std::chrono::steady_clock::now() before
and after the key simulation methods and computing the difference (I edited source code to do this
when necessary). Timing data doesn’t include program startup or circuit parsing, except for “stim
with startup+parsing" where I used date +%s%N before and after invoking Stim in Bash.
Because the various simulators I benchmarked don’t consume a common format or support a
common gate set, it was often necessary to decompose one gate into several for one of the simulators.
For example, chp doesn’t have a Z gate so two S gates were used instead when needed. Additionally,
because graphsim is an API rather than an end-to-end tool, I had to write a bit of glue code to drive
that API using data read from a file. For simplicity, I wrote this glue code to use chp’s file format
which has very few gates.
After running the benchmarks I noticed that there were outlier times at the smallest sizes. I think
this is because the last problem size in each benchmark was large, and so simulating it could for
example consume a lot of memory and evict pages that would then fault during the next run (which
would be the smallest case in the next benchmark). To correct this, I discarded the suspicious data
for the three smallest cases from each benchmark and re-ran them on their own.
I chose five benchmarking tasks: bulk sampling a surface code circuit (see Figure 1), sampling
a surface code circuit (see Figure 5), sampling a Bacon-Shor code circuit (see Figure 6), sampling a
randomly generated circuit (see Figure 7), and sampling multi-level S state distillation (see Figure 8).
See the figure captions for commentary on each benchmark task.
Overall, I would say that the benchmarks show that at larger sizes Stim outperforms everything else
Accepted in Quantum 2021-06-16, click title to verify

19

Figure 6: Delay until first sample on d×d×d Bacon-Shor code memory circuits [4]. The intention of this benchmark
is to contrast with the surface code benchmark, in that the Bacon-Shor code also has a lot of structure but doesn’t
have lots of deterministic measurements. Note how Stim’s apparent scaling on this benchmark looks more like the
other simulators than it did in the surface code benchmark.

Accepted in Quantum 2021-06-16, click title to verify

20

Figure 7: Delay until first sample on random circuits. The intention of this benchmark is to highlight simulators with
good performance in circuits that lack much exploitable structure. Each circuit is made up of n qubits operated on
for n layers. Each layer randomly applies an H, S, or I gate to each qubit, then samples a random pairing of the
qubits and applies a CNOT to each pair, then samples 5% of the qubits to measure in a random basis. At the end
of the circuit, every qubit is measured in a random basis. One effect I don’t understand here is why Stim appears
to be scaling differently from chp.

Accepted in Quantum 2021-06-16, click title to verify

21

Figure 8: Delay until first sample on nested 7-to-1 S state distillation circuits [10]. The intention of this benchmark
is to highlight simulators that do well on circuits made up of nearly independent pieces. For example, with 5 levels
of distillation, there are initially 2401 independent pieces (each with 15 qubits) performing identical copies of the
7-to-1 distillation circuit (view in Quirk). Then the output qubits from each of these pieces are put into groups of
seven and handed along to the next stage, which has 343 independent pieces. This process continues until there is a
single output qubit remaining. graphsim does particularly well on this benchmark, due to the connected components
of the graph state perfectly matching the independent pieces of the circuit.

Accepted in Quantum 2021-06-16, click title to verify

22

by one or more orders of magnitude, and that when collecting thousands of samples Stim outperforms
everything else by many orders of magnitude. A notable exception is the multi-level distillation task,
where graphsim shines due to its ability to simulate piecewise circuits in a piecewise fashion. Actually,
in most of the benchmarks, there is circuit structure present that should allow a simulator that notices
and uses that structure to outperform Stim. This would be an interesting avenue for future work.

7 Conclusion
In this paper I presented Stim, a fast stabilizer circuit simulator. Stim was my attempt at simulating
surface code circuits with tens of thousands of qubits and millions of operations in a tenth of a second.
Although that goal wasn’t reached, Stim is regardless a useful piece of software.
I still think it’s possible to simulate stabilizer circuits with tens of thousands of qubits and millions
of gates in a tenth of a second, at least in special cases. For example, when a person analyzes a surface
code circuit, they notice the repetitiveness of the low level details of the circuit and zoom out to focus
on topological details like lattice surgeries and braids. If the stabilizer simulator could do something
similar, decent speedups should be possible. That is to say, one avenue of attack is to improve the
performance of finding and maintaining sparse representations.
Another avenue of attack is to re-examine the assumptions going into the problem being solved.
The motivating use case I described at the start of the paper was a user making small iterative changes
to a large circuit. In that context the typical simulation is not a brand new circuit, but rather a slight
variation of a circuit from just a moment ago. This suggests that work could be cached and reused.
Alternatively, perhaps as part of creating the circuit, the user has provided information that can be
used by the simulator. For example, the user may have specified the circuit in terms of repeated pieces
or may have noted that a measurement is supposed to relate to previous measurements in a specific
way. The simulator could verify this information (instead of having to find it) and then exploit it.
Ultimately, I hope the experimental and theoretical sides of the quantum community find Stim to
be a useful tool. When you can do something ten or a hundred times faster, new and interesting use
cases become possible. For example, with a fast enough simulator, you could consider brute forcing
(or machine learning) the internal minutia of an error correction circuit to minimize undesirable error
propagation properties. I certainly intend to take advantage of the speed in my own work.

8 Acknowledgements
I thank Michaels Broughton and Newman for putting up with excessive jokes about brute speed. I
thank Michael Broughton for advice and discussions on profiling and optimizing code. I thank N.
Cody Jones for useful discussions about simulation algorithms, and in particular for pointing out that
randomizing the Z frame after resets and measurements was sufficient for sampling from the space of
noiseless circuit outputs. I thank Hartmut Neven for creating an environment where this work was
possible in the first place.

References
[1] Scott Aaronson and Daniel Gottesman. Improved simulation of stabilizer circuits. Physical Review
A, 70(5):052328, 2004. DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevA.70.052328.
[2] Thomas Alexander, Lev Bishop, Andrew Cross, Jay Gambetta, Ali Javadi-Abhari, Blake Johnson,
and John Smolin. "a new openqasm for a new era of dynamic circuits". https://medium.com/
qiskit/a-new-openqasm-for-a-new-era-of-dynamic-circuits-87f031cac49, 2020.
Accessed: 2021-01-26.
[3] Simon Anders and Hans J Briegel. Fast simulation of stabilizer circuits using a graph-state
representation. Physical Review A, 73(2):022334, 2006. DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevA.73.022334.
Accepted in Quantum 2021-06-16, click title to verify

23

[4] Dave Bacon. Operator quantum error-correcting subsystems for self-correcting quantum memories. Physical Review A, 73(1):012340, 2006. DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevA.73.012340.
[5] Sergey Bravyi and Dmitri Maslov. Hadamard-free circuits expose the structure of the clifford
group. arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.09412, 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2003.09412.
[6] Sergey Bravyi, Dan Browne, Padraic Calpin, Earl Campbell, David Gosset, and Mark Howard.
Simulation of quantum circuits by low-rank stabilizer decompositions. Quantum, 3:181, 2019.
DOI: 10.22331/q-2019-09-02-181.
[7] Kaifeng Bu and Dax Enshan Koh. Efficient classical simulation of clifford circuits with nonstabilizer input states. Physical review letters, 123(17):170502, 2019. DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.123.170502.
[8] Rui Chao, Michael E Beverland, Nicolas Delfosse, and Jeongwan Haah. Optimization of the surface
code design for majorana-based qubits. Quantum, 4:352, 2020. DOI: 10.22331/q-2020-10-28-352.
[9] Qiskit Contributors. Qiskit: An open-source framework for quantum computing. 2019. DOI:
10.5281/zenodo.2562110.
[10] A. G. Fowler, M. Mariantoni, J. M. Martinis, and A. N. Cleland. Surface codes: Towards practical
large-scale quantum computation. Phys. Rev. A, 86:032324, 2012. URL https://doi.org/10.
1103/PhysRevA.86.032324. arXiv:1208.0928.
[11] Craig Gidney and Austin G Fowler. Efficient magic state factories with a catalyzed |cczi to 2|ti
transformation. Quantum, 3:135, 2019. DOI: 10.22331/q-2019-04-30-135.
[12] Craig Gidney, Austin Fowler, and Michael Newman. Informal private conversations about simulation bottlenecks, 2021.
[13] Daniel Gottesman. Stabilizer codes and quantum error correction. arXiv preprint quantph/9705052, 1997. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/quant-ph/9705052.
[14] David Gross. Hudson’s theorem for finite-dimensional quantum systems. Journal of mathematical
physics, 47(12):122107, 2006. DOI: 10.1063/1.2393152.
[15] Clare Horsman, Austin G Fowler, Simon Devitt, and Rodney Van Meter. Surface code quantum
computing by lattice surgery. New Journal of Physics, 14(12):123011, 2012. DOI: 10.1088/13672630/14/12/123011.
[16] Jakob Nielsen Hořeňovský. "response times: The 3 important limits". https://www.nngroup.
com/articles/response-times-3-important-limits/, 1993. Accessed: 2021-01-26.
[17] Martin
Hořeňovský.
"generating
random
numbers
using
c++
standard
library:
the
problems".
https://codingnest.com/
generating-random-numbers-using-c-standard-library-the-problems/, 2020. Accessed:
2021-01-26.
[18] "Yack"
(https://quantumcomputing.stackexchange.com/users/11887/yack).
Answer to "how many n-qubit stabilizer states are there?".
Quantum Stack Exchange,
2020.
URL https://quantumcomputing.stackexchange.com/a/11781/119.
URL:https://quantumcomputing.stackexchange.com/a/11781/119 (version: 2021-01-27).
[19] Yifei Huang and Peter Love. Approximate stabilizer rank and improved weak simulation of
clifford-dominated circuits for qudits. Physical Review A, 99(5):052307, 2019. DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevA.99.052307.
[20] Yifei Huang and Peter Love. Feynman-path-type simulation using stabilizer projector decomposition of unitaries. Physical Review A, 103(2), February 2021. DOI: 10.1103/physreva.103.022428.
URL https://doi.org/10.1103/physreva.103.022428.
[21] Intel. Intel intrinsics guide (_mm256_and_si256). https://software.intel.com/sites/
landingpage/IntrinsicsGuide/#text=_mm256_and_si256&expand=301, 2021. Accessed: 202101-26.
[22] Angela Karanjai, Joel J Wallman, and Stephen D Bartlett. Contextuality bounds the efficiency of
classical simulation of quantum processes. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.07744, 2018. URL https:
//arxiv.org/abs/1802.07744.
[23] Emanuel Knill. Quantum computing with realistically noisy devices. Nature, 434(7029):39–44,
2005. DOI: 10.1038/nature03350.
Accepted in Quantum 2021-06-16, click title to verify

24

[24] Shota Nagayama, Austin G Fowler, Dominic Horsman, Simon J Devitt, and Rodney Van Meter.
Surface code error correction on a defective lattice. New Journal of Physics, 19(2):023050, 2017.
DOI: 10.1088/1367-2630/aa5918.
[25] Jakob Nielsen. Usability engineering. Morgan Kaufmann, 1994.
[26] Peter Norvig. "approximate timing for various operations on a typical pc". http://norvig.com/
21-days.html#answers, 2014. Accessed: 2021-01-26.
[27] Patrick Rall, Daniel Liang, Jeremy Cook, and William Kretschmer. Simulation of qubit quantum circuits via pauli propagation. Physical Review A, 99(6):062337, 2019. DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevA.99.062337.
[28] Quantum AI team and collaborators. Cirq, October 2020. URL https://doi.org/10.5281/
zenodo.4062499.
[29] Matthew Ware, Guilhem Ribeill, Diego Riste, Colm Ryan, Blake Johnson, and Marcus P da Silva.
Experimental pauli-frame randomization on a superconducting qubit. In APS March Meeting
Abstracts, volume 2017, pages L46–004, 2017. DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevA.103.042604.
[30] Wikipedia. Advanced Vector Extensions — Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia. http://en.
wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Advanced%20Vector%20Extensions&oldid=1021841294,
2021. [Online; accessed 11-May-2021].

A Short Usage Examples
A.1 (Command Line) Sample a noisy repetition code 1024 times
echo -e "
REPEAT 20 {\n
X_ERROR (0.01) 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10\n
CNOT 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9\n
CNOT 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1\n
MR 1 3 5 7 9\n
}
" | ./ stim -- sample =1024

A.2 (Python) Sample a noisy repetition code 1024 times
import stim
distance = 5
rounds = 20
bit_flip_rate_per_round = 0.01
qubits = range (2 * distance + 1)
# Build circuit .
c = stim. Circuit ()
c. append_operation (" X_ERROR ", qubits , bit_flip_rate_per_round )
c. append_operation ("CNOT", qubits [:-1])
c. append_operation ("CNOT", qubits [::-1][:-1])
c. append_operation ("MR", qubits [1::2])
c *= rounds
# Collect and print samples .
sampler = c. compile_sampler ()
samples = sampler . sample (1024)
for sample in samples : print ( sample )

A.3 (Python) Interactive quantum teleportation

Accepted in Quantum 2021-06-16, click title to verify

25

import stim
s = stim. TableauSimulator ()
# Share EPR pair.
s.h(1)
s.cnot (1, 9)
# Prepare state to teleport .
s.h(0)
s.s(0)
# Alice measurements .
s.cnot (0, 1)
s.h(0)
x, z = s. measure_many (1, 0)
# Bob corrections .
if x: s.x(9)
if z: s.z(9)
# Check received correctly by uncomputing preparation .
s. s_dag (9)
s.h(9)
should_be_false = s. measure (9)
print (f" Alice got {x}, {z}. Bob uncomputed to { should_be_false }")
assert should_be_false == False

A.4 (Python) Algebraic manipulations
import stim
t = stim. Tableau . random (10)
t_inverse = t**-1
assert t * t_inverse == stim. Tableau (10)
assert (t** 1000000) * ( t_inverse ** 500000) **2 == stim. Tableau (10)
x5: stim. PauliString = t. x_output (5)
z6: stim. PauliString = t. z_output (6)
assert t_inverse (x5 * z6) == stim. PauliString ("+ _____XZ___ ")
s = stim. TableauSimulator ()
s. set_inverse_tableau (t)
stabilizers = s. canonical_stabilizers ()
assert stabilizers [0]. commutes ( stabilizers [1])

Accepted in Quantum 2021-06-16, click title to verify

26

