Modular Parity Quantum Approximate Optimization
Kilian Ender,1, 2 Anette Messinger,2 Michael Fellner,1, 2 Clemens Dlaska,1, 3 and Wolfgang Lechner1, 2
1

arXiv:2203.04340v1 [quant-ph] 8 Mar 2022

Institute for Theoretical Physics, University of Innsbruck, A-6020 Innsbruck, Austria
2
Parity Quantum Computing GmbH, A-6020 Innsbruck, Austria
3
Institute for Quantum Optics and Quantum Information of the Austrian Academy of Sciences, A-6020 Innsbruck, Austria
(Dated: March 10, 2022)
The parity transformation encodes spin models in the low-energy subspace of a larger Hilbertspace with constraints on a planar lattice. Applying the Quantum Approximate Optimization
Algorithm (QAOA), the constraints can either be enforced explicitly, by energy penalties, or implicitly, by restricting the dynamics to the low-energy subspace via the driver Hamiltonian. While
the explicit approach allows for parallelization with a system-size-independent circuit depth, the
implicit approach shows better QAOA performance. Here we combine the two approaches in order
to improve the QAOA performance while keeping the circuit parallelizable. In particular, we introduce a modular parallelization method that partitions the circuit into clusters of subcircuits with
fixed maximal circuit depth, relevant for scaling up to large system sizes.

I.

INTRODUCTION

As quantum technology advances [1–9], there is a large
ongoing effort to apply quantum algorithms to optimization problems [10, 11], with the goal of achieving
a quantum computational advantage [12–14]. A gatebased algorithm designed for solving combinatorial optimization problems on contemporary noisy quantum devices is the Quantum Approximate Optimization Algorithm (QAOA) [15–19]. First proof-of-principle QAOAimplementations for specific problem graphs have already
been successfully demonstrated on quantum hardware
[20–22]. However, hardware implementations of QAOA
for generic combinatorial optimization problems are challenging due to the limited inter-qubit connectivity of
quantum devices, which can be detrimental for practical QAOA performance [21].
The recently introduced parity architecture [23, 24]
addresses this mismatch between the connectivity of
the problem and hardware graphs by mapping problemdefining interactions onto single-body terms, while restricting the enlarged Hilbert space via quasilocal constraint terms. In particular, the parity architecture allows one to tackle generic optimization problems, i.e.
problems with long-range and higher-order couplings, on
a problem-independent and fixed qubit layout utilizing
only quasilocal interactions.
In previous works [25, 26], QAOA implementations
for the parity architecture have been proposed where
the constraints are explicitly enforced through an energy
penalty. However, it has been shown that preserving the
constraint conditions can be achieved implicitly by making the involved operators commute with the constraint
operators [27–29]. While the former enables a parallelizable implementation with low circuit depth in the QAOA,
the latter can lead to significantly improved success probabilities.
In this work we suggest a hybrid approach, which keeps
the required circuit depth constant while reducing the
number of constraints to be enforced explicitly and thus

FIG. 1. Modularization of a parity-compiled problem. (a)
Problem graph to be implemented, with a subgraph highlighted in blue. (b) Implementation layout of the parity encoded problem. Blue dots represent parity qubits, gray (yellow) squares and triangles represent implicitly preserved (explicitly enforced) three- and four-body constraints. Explicitly
enforced constraints are used to divide the layout into modules. (c) One module of the layout, corresponding to the
highlighted subgraph in (a), with terms of the driver Hamiltonian illustrated by red and blue lines. The modularization
leads to a highly parallelizable circuit implementation of the
required driver terms. The green highlighting illustrates the
correspondence of interactions in (a) to parity qubits in (b)
and (c).

improving performance. We do this by partitioning the
constraints into a set that is enforced explicitly and a set
where the constraints are preserved implicitly by adapting the driver Hamiltonians. Fig. 1c shows an example
layout of encoded qubits and constraints for a problem
described by the subgraph highlighted in blue in Fig. 1a.
In this layout a single constraint is enforced explicitly
(yellow) while the others are implicitly preserved by the
driver, which acts on qubits in each of the shown lines

2
simultaneously. By choosing which constraints are in
which set, we can divide bigger layouts into smaller modules (see Fig. 1b), enabling a parallel implementation of
all required unitaries with an adjustable maximal circuit
depth.

II.

PARITY QAOA

Finding solutions to generic combinatorial optimization problems can be formulated as energy minimization
of general (classical) N -spin Hamiltonians of the form
Hproblem =

X

Ji si +

i

+

X

Jij si sj

i<j

X

(1)

acting on 2 × 2 plaquettes of physical qubits (cf. Fig. 1)
and a constraint strength cl > 0 [30]. Here, li are labels
of physical qubits with the property that all problem-spin
indices involved in constraint Ĉl appear an even amount
of times across all the li . Following this construction,
constraint-satisfying states are characterized by an even
number of qubits in the |↓i-state per constraint (with
σ̂z |↓i = − |↓i), and the code space coincides with the
constraint-fulfilling subspace
n
o
HCF = |ψi ∈ Hphys ĤC |ψi = 0 .
(5)
Figure 2a shows the parity implementation of an all-toall connected Ising spin-glass model, where all constraints
are explicitly enforced by three- and four-body interactions.

Jijk si sj sk + . . . ,

i<j<k

A.

where si = ±1 denote spin variables and the coefficients {Ji , Jij , Jijk , . . . } describe long-range and potentially higher-order interactions between spins. We denote
the number of non-zero coefficients by K and the number
of spin-flip symmetries in the Hamiltonian by ns . Note
that we do not consider problems with side-conditions in
this work.
On state-of-the-art hardware platforms, the available
inter-qubit couplings are typically two-body and limited in distance. Therefore, interactions as occurring in
Eq. (1) can be challenging to implement directly. Instead, we utilize the parity architecture [23, 24] that allows one to encode arbitrary k-body terms on a square
lattice requiring only nearest-neighbor interactions. This
involves mapping the product of k problem spins si
onto a single, physical parity qubit (denoted by σ̂z ), e.g.
(m)
Jijk si sj sk 7→ Jm σ̂z , where we label each parity qubit
with the corresponding k-tuple m of problem spin indices.
As a result, the K problem-defining interaction terms of
Eq. (1) are represented by local fields of strength Jm acting on K ≥ N parity qubits. This gives rise to a physical
Hamiltonian of the form Ĥphys = ĤZ + ĤC , where
ĤZ =

X

Jm σ̂z(m)

(2)

m

encodes the combinatorial optimization problem and ĤC
contains constraints to ensure that the code space corresponds to the low-energy subspace of the enlarged Hilbert
space Hphys . The constraint Hamiltonian ĤC is constructed as
X
ĤC =
Ĉl
(3)
l

with three- or four-body interactions (the square brackets
indicate the optional factor)

cl 
Ĉl =
1 − σ̂z(l1 ) σ̂z(l2 ) σ̂z(l3 ) [σ̂z(l4 ) ]
(4)
2

Explicit Parity QAOA

The QAOA [15] attempts to find low energy solutions
of Hproblem by evolving a quantum state alternately with
PN (i)
a driver Hamiltonian ĤB =
i=1 σ̂x and the (quantum mechanical) problem Hamiltonian Ĥproblem for variable durations. To implement the QAOA in the parity architecture [25], the single-qubit driver Hamiltonian
P
(m)
ĤX =
now acts on K physical qubits, while
m σ̂x
the problem Hamiltonian Ĥproblem is replaced by the two
components of Ĥphys , i.e. ĤZ and ĤC . A parity-QAOA
sequence of depth p thus corresponds to variationally
evolving the system with Hamiltonians ĤX , ĤZ and ĤC
as
|ψi =

p
Y

e−iβj ĤX e−iγj ĤZ e−iΩj ĤC |+i

⊗K

,

(6)

j=1

where the variational parameters βj , γj and Ωj are optimized in a quantum-classical feedback loop in order to
minimize hψ|Ĥphys |ψi. As a consequence, during optimization, the constraints introduced by the parity mapping are treated on the same footing as the problem encoding single-body terms, and the QAOA unitary e−iΩĤC
needs to be implemented explicitly in order to steer the
dynamics into HCF .
B.

Implicit Parity QAOA

An alternative approach to perform parity QAOA is
to start with a state in HCF and restrict the dynamics to that subspace by adapting the driver Hamiltonian
[28, 29]. The constraint conditions then are preserved
implicitly throughout the QAOA sequence, which implies
imp
that we are looking for a driver Hamiltonian ĤX
fulfilling
imp
[ĤC , ĤX
] = 0.

(7)

3
(a)
04
03
02
01

(b)

05
15
14
13
12

04
25

24
23

03
35

34

02
45

01

(c)

05
15
14
13
12

05
04

25
24

23

03
35

34

02
45

01

15
14

13
12

25
24

23

35
34

45

FIG. 2. Example of a parity-encoded complete graph with six spin variables. (a) All constraints are enforced explicitly via the
constraint Hamiltonian. The driver Hamiltonian contains single-qubit σ̂x operators on all physical qubits. (b) The colored lines
denote sets of qubits, each of which can be flipped simultaneously without leaving the constraint-fulfilling subspace (constraintpreserving driver lines). All constraints are implicitly enforced via the driver Hamiltonian, and no energy penalty for constraints
is needed. (c) Only the bottom-most row of 3-body constraints is enforced explicitly, while the others are satisfied implicitly
due to the restriction of dynamics via the driver Hamiltonian. In this setting, the blue and red driver lines (hybrid driver lines)
can be implemented in parallel, respectively.
imp
We choose ĤX
to be a sum over products of σ̂x operators. As the constraints are products of σ̂z operators,
each constraint term commutes with individual terms of
imp
ĤX
whenever they share an even number of qubits. For
imp
Eq. (7) to hold, each term in ĤX
must commute with
each constraint term independently.
imp
Fig. 2b shows the qubits in such terms of ĤX
as
colored lines for the example of an all-to-all connected
problem graph [27]. In this example, the qubit labels
contributing to a certain line share a common problem
spin index, and therefore can be associated to this particular problem spin. Thus, the sum over all such products
is the parity-mapped analogue of the “standard” driver
Hamiltonian ĤB acting on the problem spins. In the following we formalize the aforementioned considerations
and define the elements of constraint-preserving driver
Hamiltonians.
First, we consider a set of physical qubits that can
be flipped simultaneously without changing which constraint conditions are preserved. These qubits are typically arranged on the layout along a line (see for example
the colored lines in Fig. 2b), or in more general cases manifest as a tree graph of adjacent qubits. In the following,
we refer to these sets as constraint-preserving driver lines
Qµ , with the index µ enumerating the driver lines for a
given problem.
With each driver line, we associate a driver term
Y
X̂ (µ) =
σ̂x(k)
(8)
k∈Qµ

with the property
|ψi ∈ HCF ⇐⇒ X̂ (µ) |ψi ∈ HCF .

(9)

We refer to the number of qubits in a driver line as its
length. Our goal is to explore the full code space with
a set of driver terms that allows for independent flips of
any problem spin, which requires the following properties
for driver lines: A set D of driver terms is independent
iff no element Qµ ∈ D can be obtained as a product of
(multiple) other elements in D. Furthermore, we call the

set D valid iff D is independent and |D| = N − ns holds.
This ensures that each of the N − ns independent spins
of the original problem can be flipped. Two driver lines
Qµ and Qν are said to overlap, iff Qµ ∩ Qν 6= ∅. In the
following, we use D to refer to a set of driver lines as well
as to the set of its associated driver terms. Note that
the product of driver terms translates to the symmetric
difference of associated driver lines.
In contrast to the standard parity-QAOA approach enforcing all constraints explicitly as discussed in [25], we
now investigate the performance of parity QAOA utilizing driver Hamiltonians
imp
ĤX
=

NX
−ns

X̂ (µ) ,

(10)

µ=1

consisting of the operators associated with a valid set
of constraint-preserving driver lines. Provided that we
start from a constraint-fulfilling state, such a driver only
introduces transitions to other constraint-fulfilling states
and therefore restricts the dynamics to HCF .
Using the constraint-preserving driver Hamiltonian,
the corresponding QAOA protocol is given by
|ψi =

p
Y

imp

e−iβj ĤX e−iγj ĤZ |ψ0 i ,

(11)

j=1

with |ψ0 i being an appropriately chosen initial state fulfilling all parity constraints. Usually, |ψ0 i is chosen to be
the equal superposition of all constraint-fulfilling computational states (for details on the initialization see
Sec. IV). Note that compared to the QAOA-protocol
described in Eq. (6), the step involving ĤC is not required anymore, since all constraints are now implicitly
preserved and do not have to be enforced by the constraint Hamiltonian. Apart from saving one variational
parameter per QAOA-cycle, the intrinsic fulfillment of
parity constraints also results in an exponential reduction of the size of the accessible Hilbert space, decreasing
the probability of populating undesired states and thus
significantly enhances the performance of the algorithm.

4
Hamiltonians with multi-qubit terms of the form X̂ (µ)
can in general not be simulated in quantum hardware
(µ)
directly. The unitary operator Û = e−iβ X̂ , however,
can be readily implemented as a sequence of CNOT-gates
and single qubit rotations [31], with a circuit depth scaling linear in the length of the driver line Qµ (see Appendix A).

by
ĤChyb =

N +n
C −ns
X

X̂ (µ) ,

(14)

µ=1

A drawback of the fully implicit QAOA implementation described in Section II B is that the driver lines can
become arbitrarily long or overlap, which limits the ability to perform gates in parallel to achieve a low overall circuit depth. In particular, a fully implicit implementation
of the complete graph requires a driver unitary with a circuit depth scaling at least linearly with the system size
N 1 . In order to keep the circuit depth feasible, especially
for non-error-corrected quantum devices, we introduce a
hybrid implementation as a way to balance between the
advantages of the fully explicit and the fully implicit approaches. The main idea is to shorten/split driver lines
to obtain a parallelizable implementation that requires
a minimal number of explicitly enforced constraints (cf.
Fig. 2c). This can be achieved by separating the required ntot
C constraints into nC explicitly enforced constraints and ntot
C − nC implicitly preserved constraints.
The resulting hybrid Hilbert space Hhyb is thus spanned
by the computational basis states fulfilling all implicitly
preserved constraints with
(12)

Similar to the implicit approach, a hybrid driver line Qµ
is given by a set of physical qubits that can be simultaneously flipped without changing the population in the
hybrid subspace Hhyb . The definitions of length, overlap, independence and driver terms for the hybrid case
are analogously defined as for the implicit approach introduced in Sec. II B w.r.t. Hhyb .
A set D of hybrid driver terms is valid iff it is independent and any computational basis state in the
constraint-fulfilling Hilbert space HCF can be transformed to any other by applying operators in D only.
Note that this requirement is less strict compared to
fully constraint-preserving driver lines, since D can contain N − ns ≤ |D| ≤ N + nC − ns driver terms. In the
present work we focus on |D| = N + nC − ns , since in
all other cases, there are explicitly enforced constraints
which are naturally preserved by the driver lines.
As a consequence, for a problem with N spin variables
and ntot
C constraints of which nC are enforced explicitly

1 In this case, the length of a single driver line and therefore also

its implementation depth is already proportional to N .

(13)

we can choose the hybrid driver Hamiltonian as

HYBRID APPROACH AND
MODULARIZATION

dim(Hhyb ) = 2N +nC −ns .

Ĉl ,

l=1

hyb
ĤX
=

III.

nC
X

with driver terms X̂ (µ) associated to a valid set of hybrid driver lines. In contrast to the fully implicit implementation, we can no longer associate individual driver
terms to single-qubit operations on the original problem
spins. Note that the fully implicit and the fully explicit
approach correspond to the limiting cases of the hybrid
approach with nC = 0 and nC = ntot
C , respectively.
The QAOA-protocol is now given by
|ψi =

p
Y

hyb

hyb

e−iβj ĤX e−iγj ĤZ e−iΩj ĤC |ψ0 i ,

(15)

j=1
hyb
with replacements ĤX 7→ ĤX
and ĤC 7→ ĤChyb compared to the protocol described in Eq. (6). The initial
state |ψ0 i is typically chosen to be the equal superposition of all computational basis states in Hhyb (see Sec. IV
for details on the initialization).
In the following, we demonstrate our hybrid approach
on the example of the complete graph and then show how
this can be applied to arbitrary graphs. At the end of
this section we introduce the concept of modularization
in order to extend our approach to large system sizes with
system-size independent circuit depths.

A.

Example: Complete graph

In this section we illustrate the above introduced concepts on the example of a parity-encoded problem graph
with all-to-all connectivity as pictured in Fig. 2. Starting
from a constraint-fulfilling state, flipping a single physical qubit leads to the violation of at least one constraint.
When flipping more qubits until all constraints are fulfilled again, the minimal set of flipped qubits will correspond to a constraint-preserving driver line as in Fig. 2b.
The corresponding driver terms, however, cannot be implemented in parallel and result in impractical circuit
depths.
A particular way to render the circuit shorter and parallelizable is to “break” each long constraint-preserving
driver line into two shorter driver lines by enforcing all
three-body constraints explicitly as depicted in Fig. 2c.
Note that in such a setting, the original driver lines (cf.
Fig. 2b) also remain valid, even though the bottom constraints are explicitly enforced. Switching a constraint
from an implicit to an explicit implementation doubles
the dimension of the reachable subspace by including

5
(a)

(b)

04

012

0

05

135

013

0

012

014

02

01

015

35

03

01

02

234

13

23

235

45

34

14

04

146

26

16

156

456

346

146

6

FIG. 3. Constraint layout examples with partitioning into
three- and four-body constraints. (a) The special case with
only four-body constraints for which the driver lines may be
chosen to be strictly horizontal or vertical and can be parallelized trivially. (b) General example with both, threeand four-body constraints. Implementing all three-body constraints explicitly still allows for parallel execution of all horizontal (vertical) lines. The shown driver terms preserve all
four-body constraints (gray), while three-body constraints
have to be explicitly enforced in ĤC (yellow). The driver
line in the first row has been omitted as it can be obtained
via symmetric difference of the others. Qubits not involved in
any of the shown driver lines are part of a single-qubit driver
(not depicted).

states that violate the corresponding explicitly enforced
constraint. This increased flexibility allows one to split
the original driver line into two shorter driver lines, such
that each of these two lines violate the switched constraint and the symmetric difference of the two lines restores the original driver line.
The resulting driver Hamiltonian can be easily parallelized by classifying the lines into two groups by their
orientation in the layout. In Fig. 2c, this classification is
represented by the red and blue coloring of lines. As
none of the lines within a group overlap, their corresponding gate sequences can be executed at the same
time. Hence, the implementation of the total driver unihyb
tary exp(−iβ ĤX
) takes a circuit depth of at most 2N .
This can be further reduced to a constant depth by modularization of the layout, as explained in section III C.

B.

Arbitrary (hyper-)graphs

Compiling more general graphs, and in particular hypergraphs, to the parity architecture leads to a variety of placements of three- and four-body constraints
among qubits in a square lattice geometry (cf. Fig. 3
and Ref. [24]). In the simplest case, requiring only fourbody constraints, we can construct a driver Hamiltonian
which preserves all constraints from only straight horizontal and vertical lines (cf. Fig 3a). This is still true
for most layouts with mixed three- and four-body constraints where all three-body constraints are enforced explicitly (see Fig. 3b). The only exception are layouts with
isolated groups of three-body constraints, which are not

125

01

1

04

46

35

023

0

14

06

235

03

02

124

026

07

37

27

014

6

08

83

82

87

867

FIG. 4. Example of an optimized set of explicitly enforced
constraints (yellow). The optimization aims at increasing the
number of implicitly preserved three-body constraints (gray
triangles) which cause the driver lines shown in green to deviate from straight line shapes. The yellow square is a fourbody constraint which is kept explicitly enforced to connect
the adjacent explicitly enforced three-body constraint to the
boundary, simplifying the driver lines. One line has been
omitted as it can be obtained via symmetric difference of the
others.

connected to the boundary of the layout through adjacent explicitly enforced constraints. Enforcing isolated
constraints explicitly can require more complicated driver
lines, including turns and branches. This can be circumvented by explicitly enforcing additional constraints until
all isolated explicitly enforced constraints are connected
to the boundary via other explicitly enforced constraints.
Hence, a simple strategy to partition the constraints is
to explicitly enforce all three-body constraints, and all
four-body constraints required to connect them to the
boundary, while the remaining four-body constraints are
implicitly preserved by the drivers. The full driver circuit can then be implemented in two steps, where all
horizontal and all vertical driver lines are implemented
in parallel, respectively.
In many cases, the number of of explicitly enforced
constraints can be further reduced since some of the
three-body constraints are automatically preserved by
the above mentioned horizontal and vertical driver lines.
In other cases, small adjustments to the driver lines by
adding or removing qubits (which may introduce turns
and branches), are sufficient to preserve even more threebody constraints. An example of minimizing the number
of explicitly enforced constraints at a fixed maximal circuit depth can be seen in Fig. 4.

C.

Modularization

With the procedure described in the previous section,
the average length of hybrid driver lines (and therefore the depth of the QAOA-circuit) grows linearly with
the dimensions of the layout. We now utilize the concept of implicitly preserved and explicitly enforced constraints to restrict the driver circuit depth to an ad-

6
justable and system-size independent value, while minimizing the number of explicitly enforced constraints.
Given a compiled problem layout, i.e. the distribution of three- and four-body constraints, we subdivide
the entire square lattice into modules involving at most
lmax × lmax qubits, separated by rows and columns of explicitly enforced constraints (see Fig. 5). As a consequence, this limits the length of the driver lines within a
module and each module can be treated separately when
constructing driver lines. In particular, if all three-body
constraints within a module are enforced explicitly, i.e.
there are only vertical and horizontal lines, the maximal length of a driver line is given by lmax . Therefore,
the circuit depth of the driver Hamiltonian implementation scales linearly with lmax , which is a user-determined
and problem-independent quantity that can be chosen
in accordance with device-specific needs. Even in the
more general case of conserving some of the three-body
constraints within a module implicitly, the problem of
finding appropriate hybrid driver lines now reduces to
smaller, separate problems for each module and the maximal length of the driver lines will still be approximately
lmax . In any case, the circuits implementing the respective driver terms for each module can be executedhyb
simultaneously. Considering that e−iγ ĤZ and e−iΩĤC can
also be implemented with constant-depth circuits, we see
that a single QAOA cycle [see Eq. (15)] for arbitrary
problem-sizes can be implemented with a constant circuit depth.

IV.

FIG. 5. Modularization of a larger layout with additional explicitly enforced constraints (yellow) arranged in a grid for
constant circuit depth implementation of driver terms. All
blue lines, and all red lines can be implemented in parallel,
respectively. Green lines, which are caused by implicitly enforced three-body constraints, only add a small contribution
to the depth and are partially parallelizable with the other
steps. In each submodule, one driver line has been omitted
as it can be obtained via symmetric difference of the others.

INITIAL STATE PREPARATION

In order to obtain a suitable initial state |ψ0 i for the
QAOA protocol described in Eq. (11) we want to prepare
the system in an equal superposition of all computational
states spanning Hhyb , which includes the limiting cases
Hphys and HCF . Consider the hybrid driver Hamiltohyb
nian ĤX
involving a valid set of driver lines D. The
desired state |ψ0 i is the simultaneous eigenstate of all
hyb
and all implicitly preserved condriver terms in ĤX
straints, with eigenvalues +1 and 0 respectively. While
this can be easily achieved in the purely explicit approach
by preparing each physical qubit in the |+i-state, the initial state preparation is more challenging in the implicit
and especially the hybrid approach. There are known
methods to construct circuits generating such a stabilizer state from a trivial product state [32, 33], however,
the resulting circuits are not necessarily straightforward
to implement and might result in large circuit depths on
architectures with limited connectivity.
In the following, we propose a simple initialization procedure with a low circuit depth. Resembling the concept
of relating a constraint-preserving driver line to a logical qubit (cf. Sec. II B) we now introduce a conceptual
driver qubit for each hybrid driver line, such that the
associated driver term X̂ (µ) acts as the bit-flip operator
on that driver qubit. These |D| = log2 dim(Hhyb ) driver

qubits represent the states of the considered Hilbert space
(satisfying all implicitly enforced constraints).
Thus, the desired initial state corresponds to all driver
qubits being in the |+i-state, which can be obtained from
the |↑i-state through consecutive rotations around the xand z-axis. To this end, we also define the phase-flip operator Ẑ (µ) acting on driver qubit µ, analogous to the
stabilizer formalism introduced in Ref. [27]. The newly
defined operators must fulfill the Pauli commutation relations
{X̂ (µ) , Ẑ (µ) } = [X̂ (µ) , Ẑ (ν) ] = 0

(16)

for µ 6= ν. For a single driver line Qµ , it is easy to show
(k)
that any operator σ̂z , acting on a physical qubit k ∈ Qµ ,
fulfills the desired commutation relations with the corresponding X̂ (µ) -rotation. As long as this qubit is not
involved in any other driver lines, this remains a valid
choice. For example, in the fully implicit implementation
shown in Fig. 2b, it is possible to do the σ̂z -rotations on
the physical qubits involving the index 0, since each of
them is only involved in a single driver line.
If none of the physical qubits involved in a driver line
Qν is exclusively part of this line, this construction fails,
as any possible σ̂z -rotation will introduce crosstalk to

7
other driver qubits2 . However, this rotation does not
affect the other driver qubits if they are still in a Ẑeigenstate. Thus, with an appropriate order of rotations
on the driver qubits, it is still possible to use the same
state preparation protocol. Additional details for arbitrary driver configurations can be found in Appendix B.
Having defined the bit- and phase-flip operators for
the driver qubits we can now prepare all driver qubits
in the |+i-state. We start with the constraint-fulfilling
⊗K
state |↑i
(in the basis of physical qubits), which corresponds to all driver qubits being in the |↑i-state as well.
To prepare |ψ0 i from this state, we have to perform physical operations corresponding to a π/2-rotation around
the y-axis on all driver qubits. These operations can
(µ)
π
and
be decomposed into consecutive rotations e−i 4 X̂
π (µ)
−i 4 Ẑ
e
, and thus be implemented with the previously
defined operators. The circuit depth of the resulting initialization procedure scales the same as the implementahyb
tion of exp(−iβ ĤX
).

V.
A.

NUMERICAL RESULTS
Circuit depth scaling

Figure 6 shows the required circuit depth to implement a single step of the QAOA protocol for a complete
problem graph (see Fig. 2) as a function of the relative
amount of explicitly enforced constraints nr = nC /ntot
C .
In the fully implicit case (nr = 0, see Fig. 2b) the circuit
depth grows linearly with the system size and the large
prefactor in the circuit depth scaling is due to excessive
overlap of driver lines. The circuit depth can be reduced
by increasing the number of explicitly enforced threebody constraints until, at the points marked by crosses in
Fig. 6, all three-body constraints are explicitly enforced
(see Fig. 2c). In this situation the circuit depth still scales
linearly with the system size, but with a more favorable
prefactor. All points from there on correspond to modularized layouts of decreasing module size lmax , further
improving the circuit depth. Initially this can lead to a
small increase of the circuit depth due to the additional
implementation cost of the constraint Hamiltonian. This
depth-increase is independent of the system size as all explicitly enforced constraints can be implemented in parallel. For sufficiently large lattices, the relation between
reachable circuit depth and relative amount of explicitly
enforced constraints becomes independent of the system
size. The points at nr = 1 correspond to the fully explicit
implementation (see Fig. 2a).

2 An operator σ̂ (k) on a physical qubit k translates to the prodz

uct of Ẑ-operators acting on all driver qubits whose driver lines
include the physical qubit k.

FIG. 6. Circuit depth required to implement one step in the
QAOA protocol for complete graphs of various problem sizes
N . The x-axis represents different divisions of the constraints
into explicit and implicit implementations: For small values
of nr , only three-body constraints are enforced explicitly. The
points marked with crosses represent implementations where
all three-body but no other constraints are enforced explicitly.
Larger values of nr correspond to cases where module-dividing
four-body constraints are enforced explicitly as well.

B.

QAOA performance

In order to demonstrate the advantages of this new approach, we compare the QAOA performance of the fully
implicit (nr = 0), the hybrid (0 < nr < 1) and the fully
explicit (nr = 1) parity-QAOA protocol. Subsequent
to noiseless QAOA simulations to find optimal parameters, we simulate the resulting optimal QAOA circuits
(including the respective state-preparation circuit) under varying noise levels of the required CNOT-gates using qiskit [34]. The single-qubit gate error rate is kept
constant at 10−3 . The simulations were done for various problem instances of a complete graph with N = 6,
corresponding to K = 15 physical qubits (see Fig. 2).
Each data point in Fig. 7 represents the median performance of 96 problem instances for complete graphs
with random local fields Jm [cf. Eq. (2)], drawn from
a uniform distribution U[−1,1] . For the noiseless parameter optimization of each problem instance, we repeatedly initialize the QAOA-parameters for p = 3, equally
distributed in the range [0, 2π), and search for a local
optimum of the energy expectation value. Note that for
the fully implicit approach there is one QAOA-parameter
less per cycle as the constraint unitary has been removed.
For each initialization we perform consecutive updates of
random QAOA-parameters until the energy expectation
value converges to a local minimum. If the energy of the
system decreases after a parameter update, the new parameter is accepted, otherwise rejected. After repeating
the initialization and optimization 100 times the lowest
energy expectation value E = hψ|Ĥphys |ψi [cf. Eq. (6)]
for each instance is kept. We subsequently calculate the
residual energy Eres of the system, defined as
Eres =

E − Emin
,
Emax − Emin

(17)

Residual energy

8
same N -scaling.

0.4
0.2

VI.

CONCLUSION AND OUTLOOK

where Emax and Emin denote the maximal and minimal
eigenvalues of Ĥphys . Furthermore, the corresponding
fidelity is given by the ground state population with respect to Hphys .
Clearly, the QAOA performance increases with decreasing number of explicitly enforced constraints nr .
This is related to the fact that with increasing nr , the
search space grows and thus additional terms complicate
the cost function to be minimized. Moreover, we observe
that up to error rates of about 10−2 , the different approaches show similar noise-dependency with respect to
the QAOA performance. Note that for all values of nr
the absolute CNOT-gate counts are similar and show the

In summary, we have shown how to improve the parityQAOA performance by interpolating between the standard single-qubit driver Hamiltonian and a driver Hamiltonian tailored to the parity architecture. In particular,
the proposed hybrid approach keeps the parallelizability of the fully explicit parity QAOA while gaining performance by reducing the overall search space. As the
key-point of our approach, the trade-off between circuit
depth and QAOA performance can be dynamically chosen according to hardware-specific needs by adjusting the
size of the implicitly driven submodules. The presented
ideas can be readily realized on any hardware platform
providing a regular grid of qubits connected via nearestneighbor gate operations. This is crucial for addressing questions about the practical QAOA performance of
modularized layouts for problem sizes inaccessible to classical simulations.
While the present work focuses on improving the quantum implementation part of the parity QAOA, there are
additional opportunities to improve its performance via
the classical part, for example different decoding strategies that result in smarter cost functions. More generally,
further improvements of the parity QAOA might also involve exploiting recently investigated phenomena regarding QAOA parameters [35–37] and utilizing other types
of mixing Hamiltonians [38].
Acknowledgements - We thank C. Ertler, G. B.
Mbeng, B. E. Niehoff and L. Stenzel for valuable comments and discussions. Work at the University of
Innsbruck is supported by the European Union program Horizon 2020 under Grants Agreement No. 817482
(PASQuanS), and by the Austrian Science Fund (FWF)
through a START grant under Project No. Y1067-N27
and the SFB BeyondC Project No. F7108-N38.

[1] M. Saffman, T. G. Walker, and K. Mølmer, Quantum
information with rydberg atoms, Rev. Mod. Phys. 82,
2313 (2010).
[2] L. Childress, M. G. Dutt, J. Taylor, A. Zibrov, F. Jelezko,
J. Wrachtrup, P. Hemmer, and M. Lukin, Coherent dynamics of coupled electron and nuclear spin qubits in
diamond, Science 314, 281 (2006).
[3] J. L. O’brien, A. Furusawa, and J. Vučković, Photonic
quantum technologies, Nature Photonics 3, 687 (2009).
[4] R. Blatt and C. F. Roos, Quantum simulations with
trapped ions, Nature Physics 8, 277 (2012).
[5] C. Kokail et al., Self-verifying variational quantum simulation of lattice models, Nature 569, 355 (2019).
[6] M. Kjaergaard, M. E. Schwartz, J. Braumüller,
P. Krantz, J. I.-J. Wang, S. Gustavsson, and W. D.

Oliver, Superconducting qubits: Current state of play,
Annual Review of Condensed Matter Physics 11, 369
(2020).
[7] S. Hollerith et al., Realizing distance-selective interactions in a rydberg-dressed atom array (2021),
arXiv:2110.10125 [quant-ph].
[8] P. Scholl et al., Quantum simulation of 2D antiferromagnets with hundreds of Rydberg atoms, Nature 595, 233
(2021).
[9] S. Ebadi et al., Quantum phases of matter on a 256atom programmable quantum simulator, Nature 595,
227 (2021).
[10] P. Hauke, H. G. Katzgraber, W. Lechner, H. Nishimori,
and W. D. Oliver, Perspectives of quantum annealing:
methods and implementations, Reports on Progress in

0.0

Fidelity

nr

10 1

0.0
0.4
0.6
1.0

10 2
10 3
10 3

10 2
CNOT-gate error rate

10 1

FIG. 7. QAOA performance as a function of the CNOT-gate
error rate for various relative amounts of explicitly enforced
constraints nr . Median residual energy and fidelity were averaged over 96 problem instances of complete graphs with
N = 6 nodes, corresponding to K = 15 physical qubits. The
colored markers on the y-axis indicate the median residual
energy/fidelity for the noiseless case. The errorbars represent
the 25th and 75th percentile over the problem instances.

9
Physics 83, 054401 (2020).
[11] K. Bharti et al., Noisy intermediate-scale quantum algorithms, Rev. Mod. Phys. 94, 015004 (2022).
[12] F. Arute et al., Quantum supremacy using a programmable superconducting processor, Nature 574, 505
(2019).
[13] H.-S. Zhong et al., Quantum computational advantage
using photons, Science 370, 1460 (2020).
[14] Y. Wu et al., Strong quantum computational advantage
using a superconducting quantum processor, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 127, 180501 (2021).
[15] E. Farhi, J. Goldstone, and S. Gutmann, A quantum approximate optimization algorithm (2014),
arXiv:1411.4028 [quant-ph].
[16] E. Farhi and A. W. Harrow, Quantum Supremacy
through the Quantum Approximate Optimization Algorithm (2016), arXiv:1602.07674 [quant-ph].
[17] G. E. Crooks, Performance of the quantum approximate
optimization algorithm on the maximum cut problem
(2018), arXiv:1811.08419 [quant-ph].
[18] L. Zhou, S.-T. Wang, S. Choi, H. Pichler, and M. D.
Lukin, Quantum approximate optimization algorithm:
Performance, mechanism, and implementation on nearterm devices, Phys. Rev. X 10, 021067 (2020).
[19] M. B. Hastings, Classical and quantum bounded depth
approximation algorithms (2019), arXiv:1905.07047
[quant-ph].
[20] G. Pagano et al., Quantum approximate optimization of
the long-range Ising model with a trapped-ion quantum
simulator, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 117, 25396 (2020).
[21] M. P. Harrigan et al., Quantum approximate optimization of non-planar graph problems on a planar superconducting processor, Nature Physics 17, 332 (2021).
[22] S. Ebadi et al., Quantum Optimization of Maximum
Independent Set using Rydberg Atom Arrays (2022),
arXiv:2202.09372 [quant-ph].
[23] W. Lechner, P. Hauke, and P. Zoller, A quantum annealing architecture with all-to-all connectivity from local interactions, Science Advances 1 (2015).
[24] K. Ender, R. ter Hoeven, B. E. Niehoff, M. Drieb-Schön,
and W. Lechner, Parity quantum optimization: Compiler
(2021), arXiv:2105.06233 [quant-ph].
[25] W. Lechner, Quantum approximate optimization with

parallelizable gates, IEEE Transactions on Quantum Engineering 1, 1 (2020).
[26] C. Dlaska, K. Ender, G. B. Mbeng, A. Kruckenhauser,
W. Lechner, and R. van Bijnen, Quantum optimization
via four-body Rydberg gates (2021), arXiv:2106.02663
[quant-ph].
[27] A. Rocchetto, S. C. Benjamin, and Y. Li, Stabilizers as
a design tool for new forms of the Lechner-Hauke-Zoller
annealer, Science advances 2, e1601246 (2016).
[28] I. Hen and M. S. Sarandy, Driver hamiltonians for constrained optimization in quantum annealing, Phys. Rev.
A 93, 062312 (2016).
[29] S. Hadfield, Z. Wang, B. O’Gorman, E. G. Rieffel,
D. Venturelli, and R. Biswas, From the quantum approximate optimization algorithm to a quantum alternating
operator ansatz, Algorithms 12 (2019).
[30] M. Lanthaler and W. Lechner, Minimal constraints in the
parity formulation of optimization problems, New Journal of Physics 23, 083039 (2021).
[31] A. Cowtan, S. Dilkes, R. Duncan, W. Simmons, and
S. Sivarajah, Phase gadget synthesis for shallow circuits,
Electronic Proceedings in Theoretical Computer Science
318, 213–228 (2020).
[32] S. Aaronson and D. Gottesman, Improved simulation of
stabilizer circuits, Phys. Rev. A 70, 052328 (2004).
[33] H. J. Garcia, I. L. Markov, and A. W. Cross, Efficient inner-product algorithm for stabilizer states (2012),
arXiv:1210.6646 [cs.ET].
[34] http://qiskit.org.
[35] M. Streif and M. Leib, Training the quantum approximate optimization algorithm without access to a quantum processing unit, Quantum Science and Technology
5, 034008 (2020).
[36] V. Akshay, D. Rabinovich, E. Campos, and J. Biamonte,
Parameter concentrations in quantum approximate optimization, Phys. Rev. A 104, L010401 (2021).
[37] J. Wurtz and D. Lykov, Fixed-angle conjectures for the
quantum approximate optimization algorithm on regular
maxcut graphs, Phys. Rev. A 104, 052419 (2021).
[38] L. C. G. Govia, C. Poole, M. Saffman, and H. K. Krovi,
Freedom of the mixer rotation axis improves performance in the quantum approximate optimization algorithm, Phys. Rev. A 104, 062428 (2021).

Appendix A: Decomposition of driver terms

Fig. 8 shows a possible decomposition of the unitary corresponding to the evolution under a driver term [cf. Eq. (8)]
into CNOT gates and rotations. Any driver line containing n connected qubits can be implemented with a circuit
depth of at most n + 2. Note that there are many representations of this operator as a circuit [31], for example the
qubit used for the rotation can be freely chosen. This freedom can be used to minimize the circuit depth of a sequence
of such operators.

Appendix B: Instructions for initial state preparation

As initial state |ψ0 i for the different QAOA-protocols we want to prepare the superposition of all valid states in
⊗K
the considered Hilbert-space. This state can be prepared from |↑i
via rotations around the y-axis on all driver
qubits. In the fully physical case the required operations trivially translate to single-qubit rotations on all physical
qubits, while in the fully implicit and especially the hybrid case these operations involve multiple overlapping driver
lines and the order of implementation has to be considered to achieve a valid and low-depth state preparation circuit.

...

...

...

10

Rx

...

...

...

FIG. 8. Circuit diagram for decomposing the operator e−iβ X̂
gates. The filled small circles denote the control qubit.

(µ)

associated with a driver line into CNOT- and Rx -rotation

The case where a physical qubit is involved in multiple driver lines has to be treated with care. Implementing
a physical σ̂z -operation on such a qubit has an effect on all involved driver lines and thus can introduce unwanted
crosstalk. Whenever possible, we must therefore choose a qubit which is not involved in any other driver lines to
perform the phase operation on. If this is not possible, the Ẑ (µ) -operation, performed on a qubit k for a driver line
Qµ 3 k can still be used, as long as all driver qubits associated with other driver lines Qν involving qubit k are in an
⊗K
eigenstate of Ẑ (ν) and thus not affected by the rotation. In the initially prepared state |↑i , all driver qubits are in
the Ẑ-eigenstate. That enables us to find a sequence of driver rotations such that for every Ẑ (µ) -rotation there is at
least one qubit of the corresponding driver line which is either not included in any other driver lines, or only involved
in driver lines whose state has not been rotated yet. After initializing all K physical qubits in |↑i we assign a priority
to every driver line, such that X̂- and Ẑ-rotations
π

Rλ = e−i 4 Ẑ

(λ)

π

e−i 4 X̂

(λ)

(B1)

on the driver qubits, applied in descending order in their priority, will transform all driver qubits into the |+i state.
Here λ enumerates the driver lines and the X (λ) /Z (λ) describe bit-flip/phase-flip operations on the corresponding
driver qubit.
The priorities of the lines can be found iteratively, we call every line “unassigned” until it has been assigned a
priority:
1. Assign all lines Qµ which contain at least one qubit which is not in any other lines the priority Pµ = 0.
2. Assign all unassigned lines Qν which overlap at least one line with priority Pµ (and do not overlap other,
unassigned lines at the same qubit) the priority Pν = Pµ + 1
3. Repeat step 2 until all lines have a priority.
The initial state |ψ0 i can then be prepared as
|ψ0 i =

PY
max

Y

π

e−i 4 Ẑ

(µ)

π

e−i 4 X̂

(µ)

⊗K

|↑i

,

(B2)

κ=0 Qµ ∈Dκ

where Pmax is the highest assigned priority and Dκ ⊆ D is the subset of driver lines with priority κ. Note that the
order of the products must be such that the terms with higher priority are applied first. Equal priorities can be
implemented in any order, their required gate sequences can be performed in parallel (or as parallel as possible, if
there are qubit overlaps of the driver lines).
If with this procedure, not all lines can be assigned a priority, the partitioning of constraints can be changed to
include more explicitly enforced constraints. At the latest, a valid prioritizing of all lines can be found once all threebody constraints are explicitly enforced. Fig. 9 shows an example of two sets of connected driver lines in a sub-module
with assigned priorities.

11
0

2

0

2

3

0
1

1

0

1

1

0

0

0

0

1

0
1

FIG. 9. Illustration of the initial state preparation for a module with two sets of connected lines. Only implicitly enforced
constraints are shown. The line colors and numbers indicate the priority Pµ of a line, with the highlighted qubits showing an
example of where the physical σ̂z -rotations may be implemented. Rotations on lines with higher priority must be performed
first.

